 
will tell you that the alkalinity or acidity of the water, that is the pH of the water that you 
drink, has a profound impact on your ability to absorb and utilize that water and the 
impact that those water Molecules have on specific biological systems, so it turns out. 
Ph is very important, but not for the reasons that you've probably heard about previously. 
I will talk about how the temperature of water that you drink does indeed turn out to be 
important for the rate of absorption of that water and its impact on the cells, tissues and 
organs of your body and thereby your health. And I will talk about various zero cost and 
low-cost tools that you can use in order to get the most out of the water that you drink. 
And finally, I will talk about what, when and how to hydrate your body best. 
 
00:03:33 Tool Deliberate Cold Exposure, Immersion & Showers Mood & Fat Loss 
 
Before we dive into today's topic, I want to share with you some very interesting results 
that were just published on the use of deliberate cold exposure to benefit fat loss now 
deliberate cold exposure is a topic I have covered before on this podcast. We have an 
entire episode about that that I have Linked In the show note, captions, deliberate cold 
exposure can be done by way of cold showers or immersion in cold or ice water up to 
the neck. That’s typically the ways that it's done. It has been shown to reduce 
inflammation to increase metabolism, and I think some of the most exciting results that 
have been published are the results, certainly in humans, showing that deliberate cold 
exposure can increase the release of so-called catecholamines, which are dopamine, 
norepinephrine and epinephrine, and those Increases in those three molecules are quite 
long, lasting and lead to substantial increases in mood and focus throughout the day 
now many people out there hear about deliberate cold exposure and cringe other people 
hear about it and cringe, because they've heard that deliberate cold exposure, especially 
by Way of immersion in water can block the adaptation to strength or hypertrophy 
training. What I mean by that is yes. Indeed, there are data showing that if one gets into 
very cold water up to the neck in the six hours anytime, that is in the six hours after 
strength, hypertrophy training that some of the strength and hypertrophy increases that 
one would observe are blocked by that deliberate Cold exposure, however, after six 
hours does not seem to be a problem, so it can be done on other days. Besides the 
strength and hypertrophy training, it can be done before strength and hypertrophy 
training. It can be done after endurance work, and I should mention that it does not 

 
appear that cold showers disrupt the adaptations to strength and hypertrophy training, 
even if they are done immediately after strength or hypertrophy training. Okay, with that 
said, many people do enjoy the effects of deliberate cold exposure, in particular for those 
increases in mood and alertness. That are the consequence of those increases in the 
catecholamines dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, and again those increases 
are very long lasting. So it's not just during the exposure to cold. It is for several hours up 
to four, maybe even five or six hours, depending on how cold and how long the 
deliberate cold exposure happens to be again, there's a lot to say and explore about 
deliberate cold exposure. So again, I will just refer you to the episode on deliberate cold 
exposure. If you want to explore the mechanisms and the positive Health outcomes, 
some of the controversies within the data Etc within that episode, meanwhile, I definitely 
want to share with you the results of this recent study that just came out. The title of this 
study is impact of cold exposure on life, satisfaction and physical composition of 
soldiers. The reason this study is very interesting is that it's one of the few studies that 
used or, I should say, explored both deliberate cold exposure by immersion in cold 
water. As well as deliberate cold exposure by way of cold showers as it relates to weight 
loss, now, there's already data out there on the effects of deliberate cold exposure and 
metabolism, and here I'm mainly referring to the beautiful work of Dr Susanna soberg 
and colleagues in Scandinavia. That showed that people that do 11 minutes total of 
deliberate cold exposure by immersion and cold water up to the neck per week. So 11 
minutes per week, total spread out across some different sessions by way of getting into 
water. That’s uncomfortably cold up to the neck and and getting out and then doing that 
several times per week to hit that 11 minutes or more threshold, and this is very 
important. We'Ll come up in a moment in the context of this new study and warming up 
not by getting into a warm shower, which is frankly, what I do after my cold showers or 
getting into the ice bath or cold water immersion, but rather forcing their body to Warm 
up, Naturally, by using its own metabolic abilities. In those studies, they observed 
substantial increases in brown, fat stores, which are fat stores that you really want 
around the heart and clavicles increases in metabolism that were quite dramatic in my 
opinion, and that could be very beneficial for allowing people to feel more comfortable at 
cold Temperatures when they're not in cold water and on and on so lots of benefits 
shown in that study in this study, what I thought was particularly interesting is again: they 
explored both immersion and cold water and cold showers and the duration of cold 
exposure that they found Led to substantial fat loss, especially around the abdomen, 

 
was very brief, deliberate cold exposure. Let me give you a few details about this study. 
The study involved 49 subjects that include both males and females. This is also really 
important. The beautiful work of Susanna, soberg and colleagues, as far as I know, only 
looked at males. This study looked at males and females. They were 19 to 30 years old 
and there basically were two groups. People are either were assigned to get deliberate 
coal exposure or they were not assigned to deliberate cold exposure. The form of 
deliberate cold exposure involved one session per week of cold immersion in cold water 
up to the neck and to just give you a sense of how cold it was. It was three degrees 
Celsius which translates to about 37 and a half degrees Fahrenheit. That’s pretty darn 
cold, but it was only for two minutes: okay, so one session at three degrees Celsius, 
otherwise known as 37.4 degrees Fahrenheit for two minutes every week once a week. 
In addition, the same subjects did five cold showers per week or a minimum of five cold 
showers per week, and those cold showers were slightly warmer than the immersion in 
cold water condition. So they were 10 degrees Celsius, approximately or 50 degrees, 
Fahrenheit still pretty cold and the duration of that cold water exposure in the shower 
was just for 30 seconds. Okay. So this is interesting to me, because many people don't 
have access to cold water immersion. They might not have an ice bath or any place, 
they can do that, but they most people do have access to a cold shower of some sort. 
Plus, I think most people could do probably one ice bath per week or find a place where 
they could get into cold water safely. Now I should point out that some people will not do 
well going into 37.5 degree. Fahrenheit AKA, three degrees Celsius, water. Having 
never done anything like this before so, if you're going to try and employ these sorts of 
protocols that were used in the study, I do recommend that you ease into it over the 
course of a week or so and become somewhat adapted to the the shock Of cold water 
exposure, so maybe start at you know: 50 degrees, Fahrenheit kind of ease your way 
back in terms of the cold water immersion, especially now. Another critical feature of this 
study is, as with the beautiful work by Susanna soberg, the subjects were told to warm 
up, naturally after the deliberate cold exposure, so they basically hung out outside of the 
cold water, immersion or outside of the cold shower for 10 minutes after They were 
exposed to the cold in their bathing suit or I'm assuming they were wearing something. 
But the point is that you are not going from deliberate cold exposure directly into a hot 
shower or a sauna or something of that sort. So again, their bodies were forced to heat 
up again, naturally, after the deliberate cold exposure, but after the 10 minute period, 
they were able to do whatever they wanted. Essentially, re-clothe take a warm shower 

 
and so on and go about their day. Now the results of this deliberate cold exposure 
protocol again two minutes in cold immersion at three degrees Celsius, 37.5 degrees, 
Fahrenheit, plus five cold showers per week of two minutes, long, a little bit warmer 10 
degrees Celsius, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Now the deliberate cold exposure used in this 
study caused many different, statistically significant, positive changes. They had a very 
extensive questionnaire that related to mood everything from levels of anxiety to sexual 
satisfaction and on and on. In fact, they saw a statistically significant Improvement in 
sexual satisfaction. In the subjects that were exposed to deliberate cold exposure, not in 
the control group, although they didn't look at this chances, are those improvements in 
sexual satisfaction. Were the downstream consequence of the known increases in 
testosterone and free testosterone that occur in both men and women? Who do this 
sorts of deliberate cold exposure, again testosterone being important hormone for libido 
in both men and women? They also saw improvements in regulation of anxiety, which I 
think is very interesting, given that the deliberate cold exposure often causes people 
anxiety. But here and in other studies we've seen it can lead to a better ability to buffer 
against anxiety in the normal happenings of everyday life. Perhaps the most interesting 
and significant results that they found in the study, however, were that in particular in 
men there was a reduction in Waist circumference following eight weeks of this 
deliberate cold exposure, as well as a 5.5 percent on average 5.5 percent reduction in 
abdominal fat. That was quite statistically significant when compared to the other groups. 
Now why there was no observed reduction in abdominal fat or waist circumference in the 
female subjects? Isn'T clear could have to do with just the way that body fat is is stored 
and metabolized in females versus males? That is going to be a topic for future 
exploration. So I do think the study is very interesting because when you look at the 
landscape of Science and discussion around deliberate cold exposure, I think there's a 
general consensus now that deliberate cold exposure can change one sense of mood 
and well-being through this increases in catecholamines that I mentioned earlier, but the 
impact on metabolism itself has been somewhat controversial because the overall 
changes in metabolism that are observed, while statistically significant in many Studies, 
have not ever really been shown to translate into weight, loss or body fat loss in any kind 
of specific way. And, of course, a great advantage of this study is that by exploring 
soldiers, they were able to really hold constant, a number of other features like the 
amount of daily activity that those soldiers are exposed to their diet, their living 
conditions and so on and so forth. So, at least insofar as human studies are done, it's a 

 
very well controlled study. We'Ll provide a link to the study in the show note captions 
and for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol. That’s used in this 
particular paper or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols. To me, 
it seems pretty straightforward of pretty minimal time investment just two minutes of 
deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck and five times a 
week of 30 seconds, each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower and just a 
quick Mention about cold showers, if you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate, 
cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself right and essentially 
have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of 
your Brown fat stores are concentrated. It turns out that cold exposure to those regions 
of the body in particular are going to trigger the adaptation of increased Brown fat stores, 
which involves increases of mitochondria in those fat again. This is not the blubbery fat 
beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace, that is, your 
thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white 
adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics 
and thermodynamics will be saying wait in order to get fat loss. You need to have a 
caloric deficit. Calories in calories out still applies, and, yes, That’s absolutely true. We 
can only conclude, on the basis of the results of the study that the people that lost body 
fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more 
or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold 
exposure itself. Elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of 
the calories in calories out equation, which of course governs the rules of weight, loss 
and body fat loss as well. 
 
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry 
 
Let'S talk about water and, let's start off by answering the question: what is water water 
is, of course, H2O. Most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H2O means 
is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now the 
physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really 
important for how water functions in the body and, frankly elsewhere in our world and 
life. If you were to make a peace symbol that is to put up your index finger and your 
middle finger simultaneously, in fact, I'm going to recommend you do that now, unless 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
appear that cold showers disrupt the adaptations to strength and hypertrophy training, 
even if they are done immediately after strength or hypertrophy training. Okay, with that 
said, many people do enjoy the effects of deliberate cold exposure, in particular for those 
increases in mood and alertness. That are the consequence of those increases in the 
catecholamines dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, and again those increases 
are very long lasting. So it's not just during the exposure to cold. It is for several hours up 
to four, maybe even five or six hours, depending on how cold and how long the 
deliberate cold exposure happens to be again, there's a lot to say and explore about 
deliberate cold exposure. So again, I will just refer you to the episode on deliberate cold 
exposure. If you want to explore the mechanisms and the positive Health outcomes, 
some of the controversies within the data Etc within that episode, meanwhile, I definitely 
want to share with you the results of this recent study that just came out. The title of this 
study is impact of cold exposure on life, satisfaction and physical composition of 
soldiers. The reason this study is very interesting is that it's one of the few studies that 
used or, I should say, explored both deliberate cold exposure by immersion in cold 
water. As well as deliberate cold exposure by way of cold showers as it relates to weight 
loss, now, there's already data out there on the effects of deliberate cold exposure and 
metabolism, and here I'm mainly referring to the beautiful work of Dr Susanna soberg 
and colleagues in Scandinavia. That showed that people that do 11 minutes total of 
deliberate cold exposure by immersion and cold water up to the neck per week. So 11 
minutes per week, total spread out across some different sessions by way of getting into 
water. That’s uncomfortably cold up to the neck and and getting out and then doing that 
several times per week to hit that 11 minutes or more threshold, and this is very 
important. We'Ll come up in a moment in the context of this new study and warming up 
not by getting into a warm shower, which is frankly, what I do after my cold showers or 
getting into the ice bath or cold water immersion, but rather forcing their body to Warm 
up, Naturally, by using its own metabolic abilities. In those studies, they observed 
substantial increases in brown, fat stores, which are fat stores that you really want 
around the heart and clavicles increases in metabolism that were quite dramatic in my 
opinion, and that could be very beneficial for allowing people to feel more comfortable at 
cold Temperatures when they're not in cold water and on and on so lots of benefits 
shown in that study in this study, what I thought was particularly interesting is again: they 
explored both immersion and cold water and cold showers and the duration of cold 
exposure that they found Led to substantial fat loss, especially around the abdomen, 

 
was very brief, deliberate cold exposure. Let me give you a few details about this study. 
The study involved 49 subjects that include both males and females. This is also really 
important. The beautiful work of Susanna, soberg and colleagues, as far as I know, only 
looked at males. This study looked at males and females. They were 19 to 30 years old 
and there basically were two groups. People are either were assigned to get deliberate 
coal exposure or they were not assigned to deliberate cold exposure. The form of 
deliberate cold exposure involved one session per week of cold immersion in cold water 
up to the neck and to just give you a sense of how cold it was. It was three degrees 
Celsius which translates to about 37 and a half degrees Fahrenheit. That’s pretty darn 
cold, but it was only for two minutes: okay, so one session at three degrees Celsius, 
otherwise known as 37.4 degrees Fahrenheit for two minutes every week once a week. 
In addition, the same subjects did five cold showers per week or a minimum of five cold 
showers per week, and those cold showers were slightly warmer than the immersion in 
cold water condition. So they were 10 degrees Celsius, approximately or 50 degrees, 
Fahrenheit still pretty cold and the duration of that cold water exposure in the shower 
was just for 30 seconds. Okay. So this is interesting to me, because many people don't 
have access to cold water immersion. They might not have an ice bath or any place, 
they can do that, but they most people do have access to a cold shower of some sort. 
Plus, I think most people could do probably one ice bath per week or find a place where 
they could get into cold water safely. Now I should point out that some people will not do 
well going into 37.5 degree. Fahrenheit AKA, three degrees Celsius, water. Having 
never done anything like this before so, if you're going to try and employ these sorts of 
protocols that were used in the study, I do recommend that you ease into it over the 
course of a week or so and become somewhat adapted to the the shock Of cold water 
exposure, so maybe start at you know: 50 degrees, Fahrenheit kind of ease your way 
back in terms of the cold water immersion, especially now. Another critical feature of this 
study is, as with the beautiful work by Susanna soberg, the subjects were told to warm 
up, naturally after the deliberate cold exposure, so they basically hung out outside of the 
cold water, immersion or outside of the cold shower for 10 minutes after They were 
exposed to the cold in their bathing suit or I'm assuming they were wearing something. 
But the point is that you are not going from deliberate cold exposure directly into a hot 
shower or a sauna or something of that sort. So again, their bodies were forced to heat 
up again, naturally, after the deliberate cold exposure, but after the 10 minute period, 
they were able to do whatever they wanted. Essentially, re-clothe take a warm shower 

 
and so on and go about their day. Now the results of this deliberate cold exposure 
protocol again two minutes in cold immersion at three degrees Celsius, 37.5 degrees, 
Fahrenheit, plus five cold showers per week of two minutes, long, a little bit warmer 10 
degrees Celsius, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Now the deliberate cold exposure used in this 
study caused many different, statistically significant, positive changes. They had a very 
extensive questionnaire that related to mood everything from levels of anxiety to sexual 
satisfaction and on and on. In fact, they saw a statistically significant Improvement in 
sexual satisfaction. In the subjects that were exposed to deliberate cold exposure, not in 
the control group, although they didn't look at this chances, are those improvements in 
sexual satisfaction. Were the downstream consequence of the known increases in 
testosterone and free testosterone that occur in both men and women? Who do this 
sorts of deliberate cold exposure, again testosterone being important hormone for libido 
in both men and women? They also saw improvements in regulation of anxiety, which I 
think is very interesting, given that the deliberate cold exposure often causes people 
anxiety. But here and in other studies we've seen it can lead to a better ability to buffer 
against anxiety in the normal happenings of everyday life. Perhaps the most interesting 
and significant results that they found in the study, however, were that in particular in 
men there was a reduction in Waist circumference following eight weeks of this 
deliberate cold exposure, as well as a 5.5 percent on average 5.5 percent reduction in 
abdominal fat. That was quite statistically significant when compared to the other groups. 
Now why there was no observed reduction in abdominal fat or waist circumference in the 
female subjects? Isn'T clear could have to do with just the way that body fat is is stored 
and metabolized in females versus males? That is going to be a topic for future 
exploration. So I do think the study is very interesting because when you look at the 
landscape of Science and discussion around deliberate cold exposure, I think there's a 
general consensus now that deliberate cold exposure can change one sense of mood 
and well-being through this increases in catecholamines that I mentioned earlier, but the 
impact on metabolism itself has been somewhat controversial because the overall 
changes in metabolism that are observed, while statistically significant in many Studies, 
have not ever really been shown to translate into weight, loss or body fat loss in any kind 
of specific way. And, of course, a great advantage of this study is that by exploring 
soldiers, they were able to really hold constant, a number of other features like the 
amount of daily activity that those soldiers are exposed to their diet, their living 
conditions and so on and so forth. So, at least insofar as human studies are done, it's a 

 
very well controlled study. We'Ll provide a link to the study in the show note captions 
and for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol. That’s used in this 
particular paper or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols. To me, 
it seems pretty straightforward of pretty minimal time investment just two minutes of 
deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck and five times a 
week of 30 seconds, each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower and just a 
quick Mention about cold showers, if you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate, 
cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself right and essentially 
have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of 
your Brown fat stores are concentrated. It turns out that cold exposure to those regions 
of the body in particular are going to trigger the adaptation of increased Brown fat stores, 
which involves increases of mitochondria in those fat again. This is not the blubbery fat 
beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace, that is, your 
thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white 
adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics 
and thermodynamics will be saying wait in order to get fat loss. You need to have a 
caloric deficit. Calories in calories out still applies, and, yes, That’s absolutely true. We 
can only conclude, on the basis of the results of the study that the people that lost body 
fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more 
or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold 
exposure itself. Elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of 
the calories in calories out equation, which of course governs the rules of weight, loss 
and body fat loss as well. 
 
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry 
 
Let'S talk about water and, let's start off by answering the question: what is water water 
is, of course, H2O. Most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H2O means 
is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now the 
physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really 
important for how water functions in the body and, frankly elsewhere in our world and 
life. If you were to make a peace symbol that is to put up your index finger and your 
middle finger simultaneously, in fact, I'm going to recommend you do that now, unless 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
was very brief, deliberate cold exposure. Let me give you a few details about this study. 
The study involved 49 subjects that include both males and females. This is also really 
important. The beautiful work of Susanna, soberg and colleagues, as far as I know, only 
looked at males. This study looked at males and females. They were 19 to 30 years old 
and there basically were two groups. People are either were assigned to get deliberate 
coal exposure or they were not assigned to deliberate cold exposure. The form of 
deliberate cold exposure involved one session per week of cold immersion in cold water 
up to the neck and to just give you a sense of how cold it was. It was three degrees 
Celsius which translates to about 37 and a half degrees Fahrenheit. That’s pretty darn 
cold, but it was only for two minutes: okay, so one session at three degrees Celsius, 
otherwise known as 37.4 degrees Fahrenheit for two minutes every week once a week. 
In addition, the same subjects did five cold showers per week or a minimum of five cold 
showers per week, and those cold showers were slightly warmer than the immersion in 
cold water condition. So they were 10 degrees Celsius, approximately or 50 degrees, 
Fahrenheit still pretty cold and the duration of that cold water exposure in the shower 
was just for 30 seconds. Okay. So this is interesting to me, because many people don't 
have access to cold water immersion. They might not have an ice bath or any place, 
they can do that, but they most people do have access to a cold shower of some sort. 
Plus, I think most people could do probably one ice bath per week or find a place where 
they could get into cold water safely. Now I should point out that some people will not do 
well going into 37.5 degree. Fahrenheit AKA, three degrees Celsius, water. Having 
never done anything like this before so, if you're going to try and employ these sorts of 
protocols that were used in the study, I do recommend that you ease into it over the 
course of a week or so and become somewhat adapted to the the shock Of cold water 
exposure, so maybe start at you know: 50 degrees, Fahrenheit kind of ease your way 
back in terms of the cold water immersion, especially now. Another critical feature of this 
study is, as with the beautiful work by Susanna soberg, the subjects were told to warm 
up, naturally after the deliberate cold exposure, so they basically hung out outside of the 
cold water, immersion or outside of the cold shower for 10 minutes after They were 
exposed to the cold in their bathing suit or I'm assuming they were wearing something. 
But the point is that you are not going from deliberate cold exposure directly into a hot 
shower or a sauna or something of that sort. So again, their bodies were forced to heat 
up again, naturally, after the deliberate cold exposure, but after the 10 minute period, 
they were able to do whatever they wanted. Essentially, re-clothe take a warm shower 

 
and so on and go about their day. Now the results of this deliberate cold exposure 
protocol again two minutes in cold immersion at three degrees Celsius, 37.5 degrees, 
Fahrenheit, plus five cold showers per week of two minutes, long, a little bit warmer 10 
degrees Celsius, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Now the deliberate cold exposure used in this 
study caused many different, statistically significant, positive changes. They had a very 
extensive questionnaire that related to mood everything from levels of anxiety to sexual 
satisfaction and on and on. In fact, they saw a statistically significant Improvement in 
sexual satisfaction. In the subjects that were exposed to deliberate cold exposure, not in 
the control group, although they didn't look at this chances, are those improvements in 
sexual satisfaction. Were the downstream consequence of the known increases in 
testosterone and free testosterone that occur in both men and women? Who do this 
sorts of deliberate cold exposure, again testosterone being important hormone for libido 
in both men and women? They also saw improvements in regulation of anxiety, which I 
think is very interesting, given that the deliberate cold exposure often causes people 
anxiety. But here and in other studies we've seen it can lead to a better ability to buffer 
against anxiety in the normal happenings of everyday life. Perhaps the most interesting 
and significant results that they found in the study, however, were that in particular in 
men there was a reduction in Waist circumference following eight weeks of this 
deliberate cold exposure, as well as a 5.5 percent on average 5.5 percent reduction in 
abdominal fat. That was quite statistically significant when compared to the other groups. 
Now why there was no observed reduction in abdominal fat or waist circumference in the 
female subjects? Isn'T clear could have to do with just the way that body fat is is stored 
and metabolized in females versus males? That is going to be a topic for future 
exploration. So I do think the study is very interesting because when you look at the 
landscape of Science and discussion around deliberate cold exposure, I think there's a 
general consensus now that deliberate cold exposure can change one sense of mood 
and well-being through this increases in catecholamines that I mentioned earlier, but the 
impact on metabolism itself has been somewhat controversial because the overall 
changes in metabolism that are observed, while statistically significant in many Studies, 
have not ever really been shown to translate into weight, loss or body fat loss in any kind 
of specific way. And, of course, a great advantage of this study is that by exploring 
soldiers, they were able to really hold constant, a number of other features like the 
amount of daily activity that those soldiers are exposed to their diet, their living 
conditions and so on and so forth. So, at least insofar as human studies are done, it's a 

 
very well controlled study. We'Ll provide a link to the study in the show note captions 
and for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol. That’s used in this 
particular paper or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols. To me, 
it seems pretty straightforward of pretty minimal time investment just two minutes of 
deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck and five times a 
week of 30 seconds, each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower and just a 
quick Mention about cold showers, if you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate, 
cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself right and essentially 
have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of 
your Brown fat stores are concentrated. It turns out that cold exposure to those regions 
of the body in particular are going to trigger the adaptation of increased Brown fat stores, 
which involves increases of mitochondria in those fat again. This is not the blubbery fat 
beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace, that is, your 
thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white 
adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics 
and thermodynamics will be saying wait in order to get fat loss. You need to have a 
caloric deficit. Calories in calories out still applies, and, yes, That’s absolutely true. We 
can only conclude, on the basis of the results of the study that the people that lost body 
fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more 
or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold 
exposure itself. Elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of 
the calories in calories out equation, which of course governs the rules of weight, loss 
and body fat loss as well. 
 
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry 
 
Let'S talk about water and, let's start off by answering the question: what is water water 
is, of course, H2O. Most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H2O means 
is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now the 
physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really 
important for how water functions in the body and, frankly elsewhere in our world and 
life. If you were to make a peace symbol that is to put up your index finger and your 
middle finger simultaneously, in fact, I'm going to recommend you do that now, unless 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
and so on and go about their day. Now the results of this deliberate cold exposure 
protocol again two minutes in cold immersion at three degrees Celsius, 37.5 degrees, 
Fahrenheit, plus five cold showers per week of two minutes, long, a little bit warmer 10 
degrees Celsius, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Now the deliberate cold exposure used in this 
study caused many different, statistically significant, positive changes. They had a very 
extensive questionnaire that related to mood everything from levels of anxiety to sexual 
satisfaction and on and on. In fact, they saw a statistically significant Improvement in 
sexual satisfaction. In the subjects that were exposed to deliberate cold exposure, not in 
the control group, although they didn't look at this chances, are those improvements in 
sexual satisfaction. Were the downstream consequence of the known increases in 
testosterone and free testosterone that occur in both men and women? Who do this 
sorts of deliberate cold exposure, again testosterone being important hormone for libido 
in both men and women? They also saw improvements in regulation of anxiety, which I 
think is very interesting, given that the deliberate cold exposure often causes people 
anxiety. But here and in other studies we've seen it can lead to a better ability to buffer 
against anxiety in the normal happenings of everyday life. Perhaps the most interesting 
and significant results that they found in the study, however, were that in particular in 
men there was a reduction in Waist circumference following eight weeks of this 
deliberate cold exposure, as well as a 5.5 percent on average 5.5 percent reduction in 
abdominal fat. That was quite statistically significant when compared to the other groups. 
Now why there was no observed reduction in abdominal fat or waist circumference in the 
female subjects? Isn'T clear could have to do with just the way that body fat is is stored 
and metabolized in females versus males? That is going to be a topic for future 
exploration. So I do think the study is very interesting because when you look at the 
landscape of Science and discussion around deliberate cold exposure, I think there's a 
general consensus now that deliberate cold exposure can change one sense of mood 
and well-being through this increases in catecholamines that I mentioned earlier, but the 
impact on metabolism itself has been somewhat controversial because the overall 
changes in metabolism that are observed, while statistically significant in many Studies, 
have not ever really been shown to translate into weight, loss or body fat loss in any kind 
of specific way. And, of course, a great advantage of this study is that by exploring 
soldiers, they were able to really hold constant, a number of other features like the 
amount of daily activity that those soldiers are exposed to their diet, their living 
conditions and so on and so forth. So, at least insofar as human studies are done, it's a 

 
very well controlled study. We'Ll provide a link to the study in the show note captions 
and for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol. That’s used in this 
particular paper or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols. To me, 
it seems pretty straightforward of pretty minimal time investment just two minutes of 
deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck and five times a 
week of 30 seconds, each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower and just a 
quick Mention about cold showers, if you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate, 
cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself right and essentially 
have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of 
your Brown fat stores are concentrated. It turns out that cold exposure to those regions 
of the body in particular are going to trigger the adaptation of increased Brown fat stores, 
which involves increases of mitochondria in those fat again. This is not the blubbery fat 
beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace, that is, your 
thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white 
adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics 
and thermodynamics will be saying wait in order to get fat loss. You need to have a 
caloric deficit. Calories in calories out still applies, and, yes, That’s absolutely true. We 
can only conclude, on the basis of the results of the study that the people that lost body 
fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more 
or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold 
exposure itself. Elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of 
the calories in calories out equation, which of course governs the rules of weight, loss 
and body fat loss as well. 
 
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry 
 
Let'S talk about water and, let's start off by answering the question: what is water water 
is, of course, H2O. Most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H2O means 
is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now the 
physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really 
important for how water functions in the body and, frankly elsewhere in our world and 
life. If you were to make a peace symbol that is to put up your index finger and your 
middle finger simultaneously, in fact, I'm going to recommend you do that now, unless 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
very well controlled study. We'Ll provide a link to the study in the show note captions 
and for those of you that are thinking about employing the protocol. That’s used in this 
particular paper or combining it with existing deliberate cold exposure protocols. To me, 
it seems pretty straightforward of pretty minimal time investment just two minutes of 
deliberate cold exposure by way of water immersion up to the neck and five times a 
week of 30 seconds, each of deliberate cold exposure by way of cold shower and just a 
quick Mention about cold showers, if you're going to use cold showers to do deliberate, 
cold exposure, you're going to want to stand under the shower itself right and essentially 
have it hit your head, the back of your neck and your upper back, which is where most of 
your Brown fat stores are concentrated. It turns out that cold exposure to those regions 
of the body in particular are going to trigger the adaptation of increased Brown fat stores, 
which involves increases of mitochondria in those fat again. This is not the blubbery fat 
beneath the skin. This is the fat that acts as kind of an oil in the furnace, that is, your 
thermogenic properties of your body to generate heat and burn off so-called white 
adipose tissue elsewhere in the body. Now, anyone that understands the laws of physics 
and thermodynamics will be saying wait in order to get fat loss. You need to have a 
caloric deficit. Calories in calories out still applies, and, yes, That’s absolutely true. We 
can only conclude, on the basis of the results of the study that the people that lost body 
fat were indeed in a caloric deficit, presumably because all other factors were held more 
or less constant in this group of soldiers, presumably because the deliberate cold 
exposure itself. Elevated metabolism, thereby increasing the calories out component of 
the calories in calories out equation, which of course governs the rules of weight, loss 
and body fat loss as well. 
 
00:19:27 Water: Physical Properties & Chemistry 
 
Let'S talk about water and, let's start off by answering the question: what is water water 
is, of course, H2O. Most everybody knows that from an early age, but what H2O means 
is that each molecule of water consists of two hydrogens and one oxygen. Now the 
physical arrangement of those two hydrogens and one oxygen turns out to be really 
important for how water functions in the body and, frankly elsewhere in our world and 
life. If you were to make a peace symbol that is to put up your index finger and your 
middle finger simultaneously, in fact, I'm going to recommend you do that now, unless 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
you're using your hands for something else important, in which case do it later? Well, if 
you make that piece symbol and you look at your hand, you have a pretty good 
impression of what an individual water molecule consists of, which is H2O two 
hydrogens and an oxygen, and with that piece symbol, the fingers or the tips of your 
fingers, rather Are going to represent hydrogens your fingers, that is the length of each 
of those fingers, is going to represent the electron bonds to the oxygen and the palm of 
your hand, and the fingers that are down are going to represent the oxygen Okay. Now, 
what’s important about that, visual impression or visual image of the individual water 
molecule is that it is polarized that is the hydrogens over on one side. Both of them are 
over on one side, and the oxygen is over on another and what’s really important about 
water molecules being polarized is that they can bind to one another. By way of that 
polarization - and this has to do with something that we all kind of learned in chemistry at 
one point - but many of us forgot - maybe we didn't even understand it - the first time 
around, which is that positives and negatives attract. So when you have individual water 
molecules, they have the opportunity to interact and essentially bind to one another and 
they bind through what are called covalent bonds. Covalent bonds are relatively weak 
bonds, and so, as a consequence, water can change its comfort information. However, 
covalent bonds are strong enough that water actually can maintain some structure and 
that structure will vary, of course depending on its temperature. So what you need to 
know about water is that, indeed, it consists of lots of individual h2os and those h2os can 
arrange themselves in different ways and that temperature is a strong determinant of the 
arrangement of those water molecules that is they're bonding to one another. And in 
fact, even their spacing between those bonds. So again, even if you don't have any 
chemistry stay with me, because you'll definitely understand this, water can exist in at 
least three forms and maybe four forms. We know that it can be liquid. Of course, That’s 
really. Normally, what we think of when we think of water, it can be gas, so we think of 
steam right. So, if you heat it up, it takes on a uh, not a semi-solid or a semi-liquid form. 
It takes on this property of steam or gas. Okay. So when you see Steam or when you um 
breathe on a cold day through your mouth or through your nose, and you see your air, 
those are water molecules that are condensing. That is bonding in certain ways, based 
on differences in temperature, between the inside of your body and the outside air, and 
of course it can be a solid. It can be ice. Now. Ice is fascinating and important in 
understanding how Water Works, and this will become relevant later, when we think 
about how Water Works within the body as well, especially how different temperatures of 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
water impact, the health and behavior of our cells and the most important point to 
understand About water in its solid state is that, unlike most substances when water is in 
its solid state, it is actually less dense than when it's in its liquid state. So just think about 
that most substances like most metals, for instance, when they are in a solid state. They 
are more dense than when they're in a liquid state, so, for instance, if they're in a solid 
state, they will sink in a container filled with their liquid form. Not water. Water is very 
interesting because, as you, cool water and water transitions from a liquid to a solid it 
still binds, that is, it can form bonds between those different molecules of water, but the 
spacing between those H2O. So again, those piece symbols with hands. So if you had a 
bunch of those, if you had you know a thousand hands all making piece symbols, they 
can bond to one another, but when it's cold, those bonds are actually made further apart 
from one another and as a consequence, ice as we all know, Floats in water, in other 
words, put very simply water is unusual and special in that, in its solid form ice it is 
actually less dense than when it's in its liquid form and That’s why ice floats in water now 
this is important not just to our biology, But to all of life, because if you think about it, if it 
were not the case that water is less dense in its solid form ice than it is in its liquid form, 
the bottoms of our oceans would be covered with thick sheets of ice. And if that were the 
case, you can be absolutely sure that life would not exist on our planet. The way that it 
does and there's a good chance that we would not exist as a species, because so much 
of what allows us to exist on this planet and the other animals to exist on this planet 
relies on photosynthesis Pathways in plants that are dependent on The sun and 
interactions with the oceans and lakes and other bodies of water and, of course, the ice 
caps, are vitally important. That is the presence of ice, especially at the poles but 
elsewhere in bodies of water as well. So-Called icebergs are a critical part of the 
ecosystem that allows for everything from photosynthesis to the ability of certain animals 
to extract food from each other and from their local resources. Now, there's a whole 
discussion to be had there, but the important point for now is that the physical properties 
of the bonds between water that are made and changed depending on temperature turn 
out to be essential for us to be present on this planet at all. And for our cells to function 
in the ways that they do for sake of health and for sake of disease and we'll explore this 
later, when we talk about the critical relationship between temperature pH, which is the 
relationship between alkalinity, how basic or acidity, how acid? A given liquid, or in this 
case we're going to talk about water, is and the ways that our cells can or can't use 
water. So I realize that this is uh fairly in-depth for those of you that don't have much of a 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
background. In chemistry, I have tried to keep it really top Contour, but if you can make a 
peace symbol or if you can just imagine a peace symbol in your mind and realize that 
That’s a water molecule and that those water molecules can bind to one another through 
bonds. That are relatively strong but weak enough that they can be broken if they need 
to and that the temperature that those water molecules are exposed to changes the 
distance between those bonds and That’s what allows ice to float in water. Then you're 
going to have no problem with the remainder of the discussion today. 
 
00:26:32 Bonds & Water Phases, “Structured Water” 
 
In fact, you will also have the ability to understand things that you've observed many 
times over, but perhaps I have never thought about or really understood, which are, for 
instance, that water has a certain level of surface tension, for instance, if you've ever 
been to the ocean and The waves are coming in what you'll notice is, if you walk on the 
dry sand or gravel of Pebbles, that is of the ocean. It'S very easy right, I mean the 
Pebbles move down or the sand moves down. It depresses a little bit due to the weight 
of your body, but, as you get closer to the water you're going to sink deeper because 
that sand is more saturated with water. But at some point you won't be able to actually 
walk on top of the water right. It has been said that Jesus walked on water, there's the 
so-called Jesus Christ lizard so named, because it can actually walk on the surface of 
water. A leaf can float on the surface of water under some conditions. A coin can float on 
the surface of water. If you make coffee in the morning, you can actually take a spoonful 
of that hot coffee and pour a little bit on the surface of your coffee and you'll notice that it 
will bead up and you'll get little round spheres of water. Those are little water molecules 
bound to one another that spin on top of the surface before they sink under that has 
everything to do with the bonding between water, That’s dependent on temperature, but 
also, as with the difficulty for essentially everybody to walk on water. We'Re for animals 
to walk on water. The surface tension of water allows certain things to float there or to 
stay at the surface, but there's a very thin layer of water molecules at the surface of 
water that are more dense than the water. That resides at deeper depths. And That’s 
why most things including us sink in water? We are more dense than water. Now I did 
mention earlier that there are three forms of water. Those are the ones that we all are 
familiar with: the solid liquid and gas forms of water. However, there are data mainly 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
from Gerald Pollock's laboratory at the University of Washington that have described the 
so-called fourth phase of water, which is structured, water and we'll get into this a little bit 
later, because structured water has really been a prominent Topic in the let's call. It, the 
uh water, Health aficionados, it's a heavily debated topic as to whether or not structured 
water is somehow better for ourselves if it exists within our bodies, we'll get into that um 
in full detail later. But the whole notion of structured water is that, in the presence of 
certain solids or certain liquids, the confirmation of water, that is, the water molecules, 
actually change somewhat. This has been demonstrated whether or not it has relevance 
to the biological function of our body is a different issue, but we know that there is this 
fourth phase of water called structured water, structured water is a fairly complicated 
topic, but we can make it very simple For sake of today's discussion, I mentioned earlier 
that opposite polls attract that is positives and negatives, attract and typically things that 
are negatively charged when presented with another negative charge, either repel or 
don't attract things that are positively charged in the presence. So another positive 
charge also tend to repel. This is the basis of magnets, either sticking to one another or 
repelling for one another. There'S also the idea that human beings who are Opposites 
Attract, but That’s a different episode that we need to do in the future. The point here is 
that structured water is a unique condition in which the local environment that these 
water molecules happen to be in allows positive charges between different water 
molecules to attract one another. So again, whereas normally it's positive and negatives 
that attract in the configuration that we call structured water, positives and positives, 
attract and form bonds that are stronger than the typical bonds. That would be formed 
between water molecules and just as it kind of Prelude to our discussion about 
structured water as it may or may not relate to health. Later there are a number of 
people that believe that, within the body because of the presence of certain liquids and 
solids that the water within our cells and in particular within the interactions with so-
called organelles organelles, are things like mitochondria, the Golgi apparatus. They 
have fancy names. These are the things within cells that allow cells to do everything 
from make proteins to traffic proteins out to the surface of cells, things like 
neurotransmitters and receptors, and so on. A lot of people who are interested in 
structured water as it relates to biological function. Have I hypothesized or liked to 
debate rather whether or not in the body water is not just present in its liquid form or 
gaseous form. We know it's not present in its solid form unless you gulp down some ice 
cubes, for instance, but there is a cohort of people out there, including some fairly 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
accomplished scientists that believe that, within the body, the organelles of our cells act 
as a substrate for water. To exist in this fourth form this structured water form and That’s 
led to this whole Niche industry of people who are proponents of consuming so-called 
structured water again we'll get to that a little bit later. So now you know what individual 
water molecules consist of. When you hear H2O, hopefully you'll get that visual image in 
your mind, of an individual water, molecule being the peace symbol and a bunch of 
those binding to one another through these relatively weak bonds, but strong enough 
that certain things can take place like surface tension. Keep in mind that surface tension 
of water May relate to either standard bonds between water or this fourth phase. That’s 
heavily debated still, but we certainly know that, for instance, if you were to take a piece 
of wax paper or glass and you were to pour some water on it, you would notice that the 
water would bead up or kind of aggregate at particular locations. When you see that 
beating up or the aggregation of water molecules on a particular surface you're seeing 
two things, this is actually um kind of fun. The next time you see it you'll know that the 
the aggregation, the beading up of water with itself, so individual water molecules or 
many water molecules aggregating at one location and making a bead of water. That’s 
due to these bonds, these covalent bonds occurring between water molecules, but also 
you'll notice, that on a vertical pane of glass, say in rain or on your windshield, that the 
water will look almost like it's sticking to the glass and That’s because there are actually 
bonds Between the water molecules that have beaded up themselves and the glass, so 
water cannot just bind to itself, it can also bind to certain surfaces and the fact that 
perhaps, if you drive your car, if you were to tap the window or if a big enough bead Of 
water formed on a window that it would start to drip down. That’s because those bonds 
with the surface are strong, but they're, not so strong that it stick at that location, quite 
different than water, that is in its solid form ice that can actually really adhere. If you've 
ever had to scrape ice off a windshield, so for those of you live in cold regions, you're 
familiar with this, I have to scrape ice off a windshield. You realize that the bonds 
between water and its solid form and different Services is quite a bit stronger than the 
bonds between different water molecules with each other or the bonds between water 
and different surfaces when they are warmer okay, so I do realize that for a Lot of people 
listening, That’s going to be a pretty deep dive into the chemistry and physical properties 
of water. But all you really need to know is that these water molecules are incredibly 
versatile and can bind to each other and can bind to different surfaces and can allow 
things to float or to sink or even to move across surfaces of water. Based on the three. 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
Perhaps four different states that water can be in and that versatility That You observe in 
the natural world on window panes and rain, and clouds and hail and ice and snow and 
scraping ice on off your windshield in the cold of winter and perspiration and so on. 
 
00:34:07 Body, Cells & Water 
 
All of that is fine and good, But realize that almost all of those same sorts of properties of 
water become extremely relevant when thinking about how your body actually utilizes 
water - and the key thing here is that temperature and the so-called alkalinity or acidity, 
that is the Ph of water turn out to be very important determinants of how water is used by 
the cells of your body. In fact, as I will describe in a moment, we have entire sets of 
biological mechanisms solely devoted to trying to get water into our cells in very specific 
ways, including at specific rates and to use water in different ways. Because, as you've 
probably heard before, we are mostly water, what’s kind of interesting to me and what I 
found researching this episode is that the percentages of our cells and bodies that are 
purported to be water is a pretty broad range. Some people say we're 55 water. Other 
people say we're 70 water, some people say we're 95 water. The exact percentage 
doesn't matter so much and really just boils down to whether or not the person That’s 
stating that percentage is talking about how much water is present in our cells and body. 
At a given moment versus how much water was involved in the process of creating the 
sorts of proteins and other things of our body that are required to have hair cell skin 
cells, brain cells, Etc. So if you really want a number out there, I can't give you a single 
number. If you want to be accurate, it's going to have to be a range, and basically we are 
anywhere from 70 percent to 90 percent water, depending on how you define being 
water. That is whether or not you're talking about water being present in cells in its liquid 
form or maybe in this fourth structure. Water form, if you're um of the mind that that 
exists within us and whether or not you're talking about water that was used to create a 
given protein like a receptor or a neurotransmitter, or whether or not you're talking about 
the water, just being water as H2O. Okay, so again, it's very easy to go down that rabbit 
hole, and this is part of the reason why there's such a wide discrepancy of assertions as 
to how much of us is water, but let's be direct most of our body is water and there isn't a 
Single other molecule in the universe that we can look to and say that it has as important 
a role in our health and biology and, frankly, our presence of life on Earth at all than 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
water. 
 
00:37:37 Water as a Solvent, Temperature & On the phone. I will respond soon. 
 
So now, at a minimum, everyone out there should understand that water has a particular 
structure. So when you hear H2O, you can kind of imagine that structure and that the 
water molecules can change their conformation. That is, they can bind to other water 
molecules and it turns out they can bind to other things and actually change the 
confirmation of other things. A good example of that is something we're all familiar with, 
which is water's ability to dissolve certain substances like sugar or salt, and that is 
because salt molecules or sugar molecules are what we call hydrophilic. They like water 
and when we say they like water. It just means that the chemical structure of salt, 
sodium or the chemical structure of say sucrose like table. Sugar can actually interact 
with the hydrogens and oxygens of water and can change those salt molecules or sugar 
molecules, turning them from solid into liquid, essentially creating what are called 
solutes, which is basically the the um dissolving of solids into a liquid solutions. In fact, 
water is one of the best solvents on the planet. In fact, water is better at dissolving many 
solids than is acid right. That’s how incredible water is, and there are a number of 
reasons related to the chemistry of water. That can explain that, but, as we transition 
from talking about the physics and chemistry of water to how water actually behaves 
within our body and contributes to our health or to disease depending on the case, it's 
important to understand that molecules such as sugar and salt can Be hydrophilic or, as 
we know, oil and water don't mix, That’s because oils lipids are so-called hydrophobic. 
What’s hydrophobic, we'll just think. Ah phobic certain molecules such as lipids, don't 
dissolve well in water, and we all intuitively understand that if you take some olive oil, for 
instance - and you put it into a little glass of water, it'll likely float or beat up or form a 
little spherical or amoeba-like Shapes within the water and That’s because oil lipids are 
hydrophobic so different substances out there are either going to be more hydrophilic, 
that is, they are going to have a greater propensity to interact with water and bind with 
the different aspects of the water molecules or hydrophobic To have less of a propensity 
to interact with and bind with water molecules and I have sort of been alluding to this 
numerous times throughout this podcast already, the temperature of water and the pH 
that is the alkalinity or acidity of water will have a strong impact on Whether or not a 
hydrophilic or hydrophobic substance will have a greater or lesser tendency to interact 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
with water. You all know this intuitively as well. If you've ever tried to dissolve, say a big 
tablespoon of sugar in very cold water, you'll notice that the grains don't dissolve as 
quickly as when you take that big tablespoon of sugar and put it into a warm or hot cup 
of water. And That’s because the temperature of water actually changes how well that 
Sugar molecule is able to change its conformation and interact with the water molecules. 
Likewise, if you want to get something, That’s really hydrophilic into an aqueous that is a 
water containing solution. The temperature is also going to strongly impact that now 
there are a near infinite number of examples of how temperature and pH impact the 
tendency of hydrophilic and hydrophobic substances to dissolve in water or not we're not 
going to go into all those details. But as we migrate from our discussion about the 
physics and chemistry of water into how water behaves within our body, which is what 
we're going to do now and then, as we continue into the third part of our discussion, 
which is why and how certain types of Water that some of you are familiar with, like 
different pH water, distilled water, reverse osmosis water, why those different types of 
water are thought to and in some cases, do in fact change the ways that our cells 
function for Better or For Worse. All of that will come together and make sense for you. 
 
00:41:49 Water Transport in Cells, Aquaporin Channels 
 
Okay, so all the cells of your body, every cell, even your bones, that is the osteoblasts 
and the other cells within your bones, your bone marrow, your red blood cells, your white 
blood cells, your neurons, your nerve cells, your liver cells, your kidney cells, all of them, 
Require water in order to get the proper amount of water into those cells, there are 
basically two ways that water can access those cells. If we zoom out for a second and 
ask ourselves, how does water actually get into the body? Most of us just think? Oh, we 
drink that water into our body. Of course, That’s the main way. We can also breathe 
water molecules into our body through humid air when you hydrate your cells, that is, 
when you're bringing water into your cells, that water needs to move from your gut and 
into the bloodstream and eventually into the individual cells, whatever cell type. That 
may be, and they're basically two ways that water can access those cells. The first way 
it's been known about for a very long time, and that is so-called diffusion. Now, the 
outside of most cells is made up of fatty, stuff lipid. So, for instance, neurons nerve cells 
have a lipid bilayer, it's two layers of fat, and you already know that fat lipid is very 
hydrophobic. Okay. Now that turns out to be not a problem, but a solution for how water 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
can get across that lipid barrier. Why? It is the fact that water can change its 
conformation and lipids can change their conformation just enough so that the bonds 
between water and the bonds between those hydrophobic lipids can interact. Allowing 
the water molecule to basically pass through the lipid, because it can Bond very weakly 
or in some cases, not at all but very weakly to those lipids and then be pushed through 
to the other side. Really incredible, if you think about it, if there was too much of a 
hydrophobic relationship between the lipid and the water, the water would come up to 
the surface of that of that fatty outside of of our cells and then would be repelled away 
from it or Just stay there right at the surface, and that would be no good because we 
actually need that water to diffuse across the cell membranes, where actually it's a 
double cell membrane, as I mentioned before, two layers, so water and lipids of cells can 
interact with just enough Affinity that the water molecule can diffuse across those cell 
membrane barriers, but this is an important, but the diffusion of water molecules across 
those lipid barriers on the outsides of cells is a fairly slow process compared to the other 
way that water accesses cells - and this other Way that water accesses cells is really 
something that was just discovered about 10 years ago. So this is a fairly recent 
discovery which turns out to be a fundamental discovery, which is the presence of what 
are called aquaporin channels. Aquaporin channels are basically portals through the 
membrane that allow water molecules to move very quickly across cell membranes, at a 
rate of about 1 million h2os 1 million water molecules per second and the way that water 
molecules move across the cell membrane through those aquaporin channels is Very 
interesting, the inside of those channels and the way you think of these is they're literally 
tubes stuck through the membranes of cells. The insides of those channels are very 
hydrophobic, allowing those water molecules to just jut really quickly and almost as if in 
your mind, you can just imagine as if it was sort of lubricated for the water, though it's not 
really lubricated. The the water molecules can move through in single files, a million per 
second. Now. Why would you need two ways for water to get across cell membranes, 
one fairly slow through basic diffusion and again diffusion. Folks is the movement of 
things from a gradient of higher concentration to lower concentration, which is think 
about this, as things tend to run downhill from higher concentration to lower 
concentration, they try and create equilibrium across space. So you know if you had a 
bunch of marbles on one side of a of a box there, just imagine that these were water 
molecules because of the charges between those hydrogens and oxygens. There'S a 
tendency for those marbles to spread out and essentially take on a fairly even 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
conformation. That’s basically just diffusion across a space. Water molecules will also 
move from higher concentration to lower concentration across cell membranes, and then 
you have these portals these tubes or these channels. As they're called these aquaporin 
channels, where water molecules can move very quickly now the reason why biology 
seems to have created these aquaporin channels and again I wasn't consulted with the 
design phase. But the most logical explanation is that we have many tissues within our 
body. That often need water water very quickly or need to release water very quickly. 
Let'S think about a couple of these and then let's look at what the actual distribution of 
aquaporin channels is throughout the body. What is an area of your body that, on 
occasion will need to move water very quickly out of it? You can use your imagination 
here, but I will just tell you that, for instance, your tear, glands or tear ducts need to 
release tears very quickly. So you need to take water, That’s stored in your body. If 
there's an emotional experience or if you look at a very bright light, for instance, um or 
uh, you know, God forbid. If you get some sort of irritant in your eye, you're going to start 
to tear up and those tears are the release of fluid from those tear ducts. And so it's going 
to be the very Rapid Release of water from those tear ducts through so-called aquaporin 
channels and in fact, aquaporin channels are heavily expressed. There are many of 
them in the cells of the so-called lacrimal glands that release tears. In addition, we need 
to absorb water from the gut, and the gut has a lining, endothelial lining and other cell 
Linings. Mucosal lining and water needs often to move very quickly from our stomach 
into the rest of the body, and one way that is accomplished is through aquaporin 
channels that are expressed all along your gut. So the discovery of these aquaporin 
channels is really highly significant. In terms of understanding the different ways that 
water can interact with and get into the cells of your body now there are aquaporin 
channels, not just in the lacrimal glands that allow for tearing or within the gut, but in 
many tissues within your body, and they even Have different distributions within those 
tissues, in fact, as one looks at the expression of the different aquaporin channels, 
because it turns out they're, different forms of them across all the cells and tissues of the 
body. There'S really no single tissue within the body, except perhaps the bones of your 
body and perhaps the ligaments to some extent that don't have these aquaporin 
channels. Some of you out, there may have heard of the so-called fascia fascia and 
sheath muscles a unique kind of connective tissue that gives some pliability and yet 
some rigidity that allow for a lot of the physical abilities of your musculoskeletal system. 
It'S incredible tissue we'll do an entire episode about fascia at some point: fascinating, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
fascinating tissue fascia even contain aquaporin channels, so the role of aquaporin 
channels in fascia probably relates to our specific needs to be able to use specific 
muscle groups in particular ways at particular times. In other words, if you're sleeping or 
lying down or sitting you're, not using your musculoskeletal system as much as if you're 
running or performing some repetitive Behavior, it turns out that the aquaporin channels 
in certain tissues, like the fascia, can be used when we transition from Lomo Mobility 
states to high Mobility states allowing more profusion or access of water into particular 
cells of the body when we need it so just fascinating, fascinating channels. These 
aquaporin channels again only discovered fairly recently, so we're still learning new 
things about our biology. All the time now in a very important feature of the aquaporin 
channel is that the movement of water molecules across the cell membrane through 
those aquaporin channels, is strongly dependent on the temperature of water and the pH 
of water. 
 
00:49:46 Alkaline/pH Water; Temperature, pH & Water Transport 
 
This becomes especially important in our description and our Deep dive into so-called 
alkaline water or higher pH water a little bit later, but I will just give you a little teaser for 
now, because I'm sure that a number of people are are wondering about this. If you go 
into the store or even a convenience store, you will see pH water. Now, every water has 
a pH right. Lower numbers mean more acidic. Higher numbers mean more alkaline, are 
more basic, you'll, see pH water, that is 7.4 you'll, see 7.8 you'll see 9.8 you'll see a huge 
range of these things, and there are many many different claims about how the pH of 
water is important for regulating the pH of The body here's the real story, the pH of your 
body, that is the pH of the cells at different locations in your body, is strongly strongly 
homeostatically regulated. What do I mean by that? It means it doesn't change that 
much, which means that you have very specific biological mechanisms that ensure the 
pH is maintained, for instance in the skin cells of your skin, in the retinal cells of your eye 
in your brain cells. Now it is true that across the body, different cells and tissues have 
fairly widely varying pH. You know it has been said that the pH of bodily tissues is 
generally between 7.2 and 7.4. However, if you were to look at the pH of your gut and 
keep in mind that your gut is not just your stomach, your gut is the entire pathway, 
ranging from your throat all the way down to where you excrete things out of your body, 
that entire Pathway has different pH levels depending on where you are along the gut 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
and intestinal pathway and, in fact, having much lower that is more acidic pH at certain 
locations along. Your gut pathway is what allows those gut microbiota, those little 
microorganisms of which you have trillions that are important for regulating everything 
from transmitter production to hormone production that allow them to flourish and do 
well. That said, except under conditions of hemorrhage or changes in blood volume that 
are of a dangerous level that can lead to seizure or even death. The pH of the rest of the 
cells of your body, and also those gut cells doesn't change that much on a moment-to-
moment basis. So if somebody tells you that you should drink alkaline, water or alkalized 
water, as it's sometimes called in order to keep your body more alkaline and less acidic, 
there is essentially no basis for that at a macroscopic level or even at a local level. What 
that does not mean is that the pH of the water that you drink is not important, in fact, if 
the pH of the water that you drink is too low, that is, if the water that you consume is too 
acidic. It will not move as quickly from your gut into the other regions of your body and 
therefore the other cells of your body that require that water will not be able to access it 
as readily. You'Ve probably experienced this if you've consumed certain water and it 
feels like it's sloshing around in your stomach or it feels like it's um just somehow staying 
there or you feel it its presence more, not just as volume, but it's almost as if you can feel 
the Little waves of water along the inside of your gut now, sometimes that can relate to 
temperature but oftentimes that can relate to the pH of that water and it turns out. It is 
true that water, that is more alkaline that is pH, is of 7.4 or higher. Can move more 
readily across the aquaporin channel and in terms of absorption of water from the 
endothelial lining and the other cell type lining of your gut into the rest of your body? It is 
true that higher pH water, provided that pH, isn't too high, is going to be absorbed more 
quickly, which partially explains why some people have an affinity for this higher pH 
water. Now this is not to say that you need to consume high pH water in order to hydrate 
your body properly. I want to be very clear about that. However, if you are interested in 
what the value of elevated pH water is, it largely has to do with this accelerated 
absorption and, as we'll talk about a little bit later, there is also growing evidence that it 
can adjust the function of certain cells that are within Your immune system and thereby 
reduce certain inflammatory responses, so I realize, as I'm saying this, some people out 
there apply. You think. Oh no, this guy's, like a pH water, proponent, he's saying we 
have to drink alkaline water or buy very fancy water. Now I want to be clear: that is not 
what I'm saying and I'm also not saying that you need to purchase very expensive water 
in order to derive the maximum benefits from the water that you drink. It turns out. There 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
are a few things that you can do by way of temperature and by way of filtering water and 
a few other tricks that I will tell you a little bit later. That will allow you to increase the 
absorption rate of water in the gut, which turns out to be a very interesting but also 
potentially important thing to do for not just reducing inflammation, but also making sure 
that you're getting proper hydration of different cell types. In your body, including Rapid 
hydration of your brain cells, which, as we'll also talk about in a few moments, can 
greatly enhance cognitive function. 
 
00:55:14 Water Cellular Function, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) & Antioxidants 
 
Okay, so we've talked about how water can get into cells. There are two ways: diffusion 
and movement. Through these aquaporin channels, we've earmarked the discussion 
that the temperature and the pH of water - that is, the confirmation of water, and here I 
really want to embed this in people's minds, that when we talk about temperature of 
water and pH of water, we're really talking about The arrangement of those h2os, those 
water molecules, so keep that in mind, we've covered how water can get into cells 
through those two different ways: diffusion and through their aquaporin channels. What 
we haven't talked about is what happens to water once it's in cells, and this is very 
simple to explain. Once water is inside of cells, it's going to be incorporated into the 
different proteins and organelles again. Organelles are things like mitochondria, the 
nucleus of the cells, which contains the DNA and so forth in different ways, depending 
on which proteins are there and how hydrophilic or hydrophobic those proteins are, or, in 
some cases, aren't That’s an entire landscape of protein to water specific interactions. 
None of which we need to go into in any specific detail now. But the one thing that we do 
need to realize and keep in mind as we go forward, is that many of the biological 
processes in our body that involve the movement of molecules such as water and 
interactions with proteins, are going to involve the bonding or lack Of bonding between 
water molecules and proteins and anytime we're talking about bonding of one thing to 
the next at the level of chemistry or biology for that matter, because they're really the 
same thing we're talking about whether or not there are electrons present or whether or 
not There are charges that are opposite or the same and on and on, if you've ever 
heard, of so-called reactive oxygen species, what are Ross's or reactive, oxygen 
species, or so-called free radicals or antioxidants. All of that is really just describing the 
presence or absence of charges that are bound or Unbound. So, for instance, if you hear 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
about free radicals, sounds pretty wild right, free radicals. What are free radicals? Free 
radicals can damage cells, they don't always damage cells, but they can damage cells 
because they are essentially free electrons. They are a charge. That’s sitting out there 
not bound to anything and therefore can interact with the molecular structure of certain 
proteins and change those structures by binding to them or interfering with the normal, 
binding processes of those proteins to water or to other things, and in that way, cause 
damage To those proteins and potentially damage to cells now, fortunately, our cells 
have ways to deal with those free radicals and those are called antioxidants. 
Antioxidants are molecules that can arrive in different forms. Sometimes we think of 
antioxidants as vitamins, but they are also present in other things as well, that essentially 
bind up those free radicals or repair the bonds between cells, so that the proteins are no 
longer undergoing these. Let'S just call them bad conformations that damage the 
functioning of our cells, so there are many different theories of Aging. There are many 
different theories of disease, but there is not a single disease either of brain or body that 
doesn't in some way involve the generation of what are called reactive oxygen species. 
These free radicals and the damaging of cells at the level of their individual, organelles 
and so forth. Nor is there a single disease of brainer body that has not been shown to 
benefit from having some antioxidant interference get in the way of that oxidative 
process. So I realize today is pretty thick with nomenclature for those of you that haven't 
already realized it. What you're learning here is organic chemistry, so you can feel pretty 
good about the fact that if you can understand the water molecule and understand a little 
bit about what um uh free electron is, which is basically a charge. That’s out there that 
can potentially do damage and the interactions of things like reactive, oxygen species 
and the ability of of stable bonds to buffer against or or repair certain damage to cells as 
we're describing it here. Well, then, what you're essentially thinking about, and what 
we're talking about is organic chemistry. Now, since this is a discussion about chemistry 
as a service to trying to understand the biological effects of water, keep in mind that 
water itself believe it or not, can act as an antioxidant, provided that it's bonding to things 
in the proper way, which requires that it Get into cells in the proper amounts and rates 
which requires that the temperature and pH of that water be correct and provided that 
there's enough water there and that that water isn't bound to other things. It'S not 
containing solutes that are damaging and potentially that it's carrying some of the good 
things such as sodium or that there's potassium present again, the so-called electrolytes 
that allow cells to function well. Okay, so um That’s a bit of a trench of information and I 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
don't want people to get overwhelmed or confused. What I'm trying to do here is paint a 
picture of the biology of water, understanding that when you ingest water drinking it 
down or when you breathe water, Vapors in the steam room or on a humid day that 
water is entering your system. It'S accessing your cells through these two mechanisms: 
diffusion across cell membranes or movement through aquaporin channels and then 
once inside those cells, it's able to interact with and change the conformation of different 
proteins and accelerate or slow down different Cellar reactions. Everything from normal 
metabolism to blood pressure to damage cells, depending on a number of different 
features of that water, as well as what the cells happen to be doing at any given 
moment. So with that in mind, I'd like to turn our attention to how water, depending on its 
temperature, its pH, how much we drink or how little we drink when we drink that water 
Etc. How that can impact the health, disease and repair of different cells, tissues and 
organs of our body 
 
01:02:38 Tool: Baseline Hydration 
 
Let'S talk about how much water, or, more generally speaking, how much fluid each and 
all of us should drink each day and how much fluid to drink, depending on our specific 
activities and environment. Now this is perhaps the most commonly asked question 
when the topic of water comes up, how much water do I need to drink? The other thing 
that comes up is a question which is can't. We just follow our natural thirst. That is can't. 
We just pay attention to when we're thirsty and then drink fluids, and then that leads to 
the other question which is: does the color of our urine provide any indication as to 
whether or not we are under hydrated over hydrated or hydrating correctly? So let me 
answer each of these things one at a time and in the backdrop I want to highlight the fact 
that there are many many, if not dozens, hundreds of studies pointing to the fact that 
when we are dehydrated, our brain doesn't function as well. And our body doesn't 
function as well. So what I'm attempting to do in that statement is throw a net around the 
enormous number of studies that have shown that even a slight state of dehydration, 
even two percent dehydration, can lead to a significant and meaningful impact. That is a 
negative impact on our ability to, for instance, carry out endurance type behaviors. So 
our ability to run on a treadmill and stop at the point where we feel we can't continue is 
going to be negatively impacted. That is, we will be able to perform less work for Less 
period of time when we are even slightly dehydrated. Likewise, our strength is reduced 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
by even slight dehydration. Likewise, our cognitive performance, including memory, 
Focus, creative thinking, flexible thinking of different kinds, are all significantly impaired 
when we are in states of dehydration. Now that raises an additional question that 
deserves attention, which is how do we actually measure dehydration? Now you hear 
different things like if you pinch the skin on the top of your hand, and it takes more than 
three seconds to lay down again flat, then you're dehydrated. You hear that you hear. 
Okay, if you are to press on your fingernail and see a change in the color of the tissue 
just below your fingernail, which indeed does happen, and it does not go back to its 
original color within one to three seconds - then you're dehydrated. You hear things like 
this: if your ankles are swollen when you're wearing socks, you take off the socks and 
you can see the imprint of the socks on your lower limbs. That means you're dehydrated. 
You hear this kind of stuff, and you should probably be wondering, is any of that true to 
some extent it is true, although it can vary quite a bit by how old you are whether or not 
you're the skin, on the top of your hand tends to Be looser or not, depending on whether 
or not you're, leaner or not, so, in other words, those are not absolutely objective 
measures of dehydration now it is true that if normally you can pinch the skin on the top 
of your hand and it returns to its normal, Flattened position within about one to two or 
three seconds, and it does not do that within five or more seconds. There'S a decent 
probability that you're a little bit dehydrated, that you need to ingest some fluid or that. If 
you press down on your nail and you see the depression causes a transition from kind of 
a pink color to a white color, and then you release and it doesn't go back to its original 
pinkish color within a few seconds. Well then, there's a chance that you're dehydrated, 
but again these are not perfect measures of dehydration. You may be surprised to learn, 
and I was surprised to learn that most of the basis for these statements, like even a two 
percent dehydration State, can lead to significant reductions in cognitive or physical 
performance are based on not direct measures of hydration, but rather on measures Of 
reductions in water intake, which is a different thing right, it's saying that ordinarily, a 
person of a given body weight, needs x, amount of fluid per day and when they get even 
just two percent less than that amount of fluid, then their cognitive and or physical 
Performance is impaired rather than focusing on dehydration of tissues. Okay now that 
might seem like a subtle distinction, but it's actually a meaningful distinction when you 
think about it. However, it's a meaningful distinction that we can leverage toward 
understanding how much water or fluid we need to drink each day. Now there we can 
really point to Some solid numbers that believe it or not are fairly independent of body 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
weight. Now I say independent body weight. I'M referring to the amount of fluid that most 
healthy adults need at rest. What do I mean by at rest? I mean when not exercising and 
when not in extremely hot environments. So I'm leaving aside you a desert, Ultra 
marathoners or people that are doing any kind of movement or living in environments 
that are very, very hot here, I'm mainly referring to people that live most of their daily life 
in indoor environments could be air conditioned or not. Air conditioned heated or not 
heated. Well, we're trying to arrive at here are some numbers that can work across the 
board because of course, there are an infinite number of different conditions that each 
and all of you are existing in. So I'm not going to attempt to give you a body weight by 
activity by environment by humidity formula calculation. In fact, no such calculation 
exists. However, there are formulas that can put you into very stable Frameworks that is 
levels of water intake for periods of rest when you're not exercising and for when you are 
exercising. That will ensure that you are hydrating, with the one exception being if you 
are exercising or if you are living in very, very hot conditions and you're, not heat 
adapted to those conditions. So what are those numbers? In other words, what is the 
answer to the question of how much fluid do we need each day? And here I'm referring 
to fluid I'm not distinguishing between water, caffeinated beverages, soda tea and so 
on? I will discuss that in a moment we can reasonably say that for every hour that you 
are awake in the first 10 hours of your day, this is important in the first 10 hours of your 
day, you should consume, on average, eight ounces of fluid. Now, for those of you that 
are using the metric system, not ounces, eight ounces of fluid is approximately 236 
milliliters of water and for those of you that exist in the metric system and aren't used to 
thinking about ounces, and vice versa, just think about a typical Can of soda in the 
United States? It'S 12 ounces in Europe. Sometimes the cans of soda are a little bit 
smaller. That’s a whole discussion unto itself, but eight ounces of fluid. That is 236, let's 
just say, 240 milliliters, because we don't need to be too precise. Here of fluid, on 
average every hour for the first 10 hours of your day, which translates to an average of 
80 ounces of fluid for the first 10 hours of your day or 2 360 milliliters of water, in other 
words approximately two liters of water, plus a Little bit more for the first 10 hours of your 
day. Now I want to be very clear that this does not mean that you need to ingest eight 
ounces or 236 milliliters of fluid on the hour every hour for the first 10 hours of your day. 
I'M certainly not saying that, and in fact most people are going to find that they're going 
to ingest water in boluses. That is they're going to have perhaps 16 ounces of water, 500 
milliliters of water at one portion of the day and then maybe a couple hours of later, that 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
they'll drink some more water or some more coffee or soda or some other beverage and 
another portion of The day I do think, however, it's important for most of us to take a step 
back and ask ourselves whether or not independent of any other activity or 
environmental conditions, whether or not we are in fact ingesting 80 ounces or basically 
2.4 liters of water. For that 10 hours of the day that spans from the time we wake up until 
10 hours later now, why am i setting this 10 hour framework? The reason I'm setting this 
10 hour framework is that it turns out that your fluid requirements, even just at rest, are 
vastly different in the time from when you wake up until about 10 hours later as 
compared to the later evening and night time. And here I'm referring to people that are 
not doing night shifts, but if you are requesting a number of how much fluid to drink 
independent of our needs for fluid for exercise, That’s going to be eight ounces of fluid or 
240 milliliters of fluid on average. For every hour, from the time when we wake up until 
10 hours later, That’s the simple formulation that should basically ensure that you're 
getting sufficient Baseline hydration for the cells and tissues of your body. 
 
01:11:35 Tool: Hydration & Exercise, Galpin Equation 
 
Now, if you are engaging in exercise whether or not it's endurance exercise or whether 
or not it's resistance, training exercise, you are going to need additional fluids in order to 
maximize the effects of that exercise and to avoid dehydration, and there too, we have 
some excellent numbers That we can look to excellent because they arrive from 
research, and this is largely peeled from the episode that I did with Dr Andy Galpin, 
professor of kinesiology, at Cal State Fullerton. We did a six episode series all about 
exercise, everything from strength, training, hypertrophy, endurance, nutrition, 
supplementation recovery, everything related to exercise. You can find all of that at 
hubermanlab.com and one of the components of those episodes that was discussed, but 
that some of you may have not heard is that there is a simple formula for how much fluid 
to ingest on average. Keep in mind. This is on average, when you're exercising - and I 
refer to this as the so-called Galpin equation. The Galpin equation states that you should 
take your body weight in pounds divide that by 30, and that will give you the number of 
ounces of fluid to ingest every 15. To 20 minutes on average, while exercising okay, 
your body weight in Pounds divided by 30, equals the number of ounces of fluid to 
consume, on average every 15 to 20 minutes. When I say on average, what I mean is. It 
is not the case that you need to stop every 15 or 20 minutes and consume that volume 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
of fluid. You could sip it from moment to moment you could wait half an hour or an hour 
and then consume a larger bolus of fluid a larger amount. Although it is recommended 
for performance sake that you sip or consume beverages fairly consistently throughout 
your training, one's ability to do that is going to depend on a number of things like gastric 
emptying time, whether or not the particular exercise you're doing whether or not it's 
running Or jumping is compatible with ingesting fluid on a regular basis or whether or not 
you need to do it at different intervals than every 15 20 minutes. Maybe it's every five 
minutes, maybe it's every half hour. You have to adjust for you, but if you were to take 
the hour of exercise or the half hour of exercise or the three hours of exercise and ask 
how much fluid to ingest it's going to be that Galpin equation of body weight and pounds 
divided by 30 equals the number of ounces for every 15 or 20 minutes. And of course, I 
can already hear screaming from the back. What about for those of us who follow the 
metric system and there there's a simple translation of the Galpin equation, which is that 
you need approximately two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 
20 minutes again the Galpin equation, converted into the metric System is going to be 
two milliliters of water per kilogram of body weight every 15 to 20 minutes on average. 
I'M sure a number of you are asking whether or not hydration prior to exercise is also 
important. It absolutely is, and if you follow the numbers that I talked about before 
approximately eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid intake per hour in the first 10 hours 
of waking, that should establish a good Baseline of hydration heading into exercise, 
which then prompts the next question. I often get, which is, is the amount of water that 
needs to be consumed according to the Galpin equation during exercise on top of or 
separate from, that is, does it replace the amount of fluid that one needs at a basic level 
that eight ounces or 240 Milliliters and there the answer - sort of goes both ways. I think, 
if you're going to exercise, then obviously follow the Galpin equation in some way again, 
you don't need to be ultra specific about this. These are Ballpark figures that will ensure 
hydration, so we've set them a little bit higher, perhaps than needed to ensure more 
hydration rather than less. But basically the short answer is, if you're exercising for about 
an hour. Most people are exercising for an hour or two, probably not more than that. 
Most of my workouts are certainly the resistant training workouts last about an hour. 
Well, then, you can replace the eight ounces or the 240 milliliters of water. That’s 
required at Baseline with what you consume according to the Galpin equation, during 
that bout of exercise, 
 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
01:15:40 Tool: Hydration, Sauna, Humidity & Sweat; Thirst, Caffeine 
 
A common question is, if you are exercising in a heated environment, indoor outdoor or 
you are somebody who tends to sweat a lot and by the way we can all get better at 
sweating by sweating. More sweat is an adaptation. So if you sit in the sauna, more 
you're going to get better at sweating, if you exercise more, especially if you wear more 
layers or if you do it in hotter temperatures or more humid temperatures, you're going to 
get better at sweating over time and sweating is An adaptation that helps cool your body 
body if you are sweating a lot or you're in heat. How much fluid should you ingest in 
general? I think it's safe to say that you may want to increase the values on the Galpin 
equation by about 50 to 100. So either increase by 50 or double those numbers, if you're 
in a very hot environment or sweating an awful lot. If you are sitting in the sauna, I highly 
recommend consuming at least eight ounces and probably more like 16 ounces of fluid. 
So that translates again to about 240 or about 480, let's just round up 500 milliliters of 
fluid for every 20 to 30 minutes that you are in a hot sauna and then of course, people 
ask well how hot and it okay that starts getting really detailed, and We can't distinguish 
between dry saunas and wet saunas and again too many variables, but I would double 
your fluid intake for that hot environment exercise or for that hot environment sauna sit. 
Also, if you are feeling dehydrated okay, what does feeling dehydrated mean that 
actually has a definition that we can get into a little bit later? But what we're really talking 
about here is, if you are feeling as if your throat is dry, you are quote unquote parched, 
where you're very thirsty. Well, then, there's absolutely no problem with ingesting more 
fluids: 16 ounces of fluid or 500 milliliters of fluid per hour, while you're feeling parched. 
My read of the literature is that thirst is a reasonable guide for when we tend to be 
dehydrated. However, it is the case that our thirst doesn't really keep up with our body's 
level of dehydration, and we know that, based on some really nice studies that have 
explored the amount of fluid intake compared to the amount of urination compared to the 
amount of physical output Compared to the environment that one happens to be in these 
are sort of older studies in the realm of physiology, but here's the basic rule of thumb, 
That’s going to work for most people. If you are feeling parched consume fluids. Ideally, 
you consume fluids that don't contain caffeine or other diuretics diuretics being um 
substances that cause the release, the urination of fluid from the body and or if you are 
consuming caffeine, other prior to or after bouts of exercise or even just at work or you 
work In an air-conditioned or otherwise dry, cool or hot environment that you try and 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
include some sodium and ideally sodium potassium magnesium, the electrolytes in that 
beverage. So it could be a little pinch of sea salt with some lemon to adjust the taste a 
little bit. It could be an electrolyte drink of element or some other sort. There are a lot of 
different types out there for most people drinking pure water, and I realize that many 
people do just like the taste of pure water chances are you're going to have enough 
electrolytes. Unless you're sweating quite a bit or you're exercising quite a lot and under 
conditions where you are consuming very few carbohydrates, you're going to excrete 
more fluid if you are ingesting caffeine, whether That’s from tea or coffee, I highly 
recommend increasing your non-caffeine fluid intake about two To one for every volume 
of caffeine, so in other words, if you have six ounces or eight ounces of coffee, you're, 
going to want 12 to 16 ounces of fluid, ideally fluid with electrolytes or a little pinch of 
salt. In order to offset that dehydration, 
 
01:19:15 Hydration; Cognitive & Physical Performance  
 
Now, hopefully, those will provide good rules of thumb for what people want to do when 
they're, just moving about their day again underscored by the fact that even slight levels 
of dehydration can really impair our cognitive and physical performance, largely by 
creating fatigue. But more often than not by creating brain fog, you know I get so many 
questions about brain fog. Why do I have brain fog? Why do I have brain fog? There is a 
vast literature showing that quality hydration, meaning hydration, that matches the 
demands of humidity and output, as described in the equations bef that we went over a 
little bit before really can enhance Clarity of focus and overall energy and we'll talk about 
why that is. But I will just allude to it a little bit here. The reason why ingesting sufficient 
fluids can enhance our ability to focus and in fact can reduce brain fog and can increase 
physical Vigor and output is not mysterious to us. We know that there are two 
mechanisms by which fluid intake triggers elevated levels of alertness, and it all has to 
do with the so-called sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system, which is a real 
mouthful, but basically the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system. As many 
of you've heard me, talk about before is the aspect of your nervous system. That makes 
you more alert has nothing to do with emotional sympathy has to do with a bunch of 
neurons in the middle of your spinal cord, called the sympathetic chain ganglia and 
some other related neural networks in your body, as well as regions of your brain. Like 
the locus ceruleus that release things like epinephrine and norepinephrine and make you 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
more alert and in a kind of magnificent Arrangement, or I think magnificent Arrangement 
when we have fluid in our gut and when our cells are well hydrated and believe it or not. 
When our bladder contains fluid within it, there is an elevation in activity of the 
sympathetic nervous system. By way of two Pathways, one is mechanical. In fact, we 
have so-called stretch receptors in our bladder and in our gut these stretch, receptors 
have fancy names like trp trip channels as they're called or Piezo, which are these 
stretch, sensing channels. This is the beautiful work of many Laboratories, but in 
particular, David Julius and ardum periputian David Julius, is at UC. San Francisco 
ardem is at the Scripps Institute, they've discovered a bunch of channels and cells that 
sends things from cold to different mechanical pressure, including expansion of tissues, 
so-called mechanosensation, and basically, what it all boils down to is that when our 
bladder has some fluid in it, When our stomach has some fluid in it and when our cells 
are sufficiently hydrated, they send information about the mechanical presence of that 
distension. Even and here I'm not talking about being like overly full or you know full 
chock-a-block full of fluid or your bladder feeling. You know really really full we'll talk 
about that in a moment, but when we are sufficiently hydrated, there's a mechanical 
signature of that which is the expansion of our tissues, because it has more fluid in it. 
And there are chemical signals as well, which is the movement of water across those 
aquaporin channels, is actually understood at a biological level by ourselves and sends 
information to the areas of the brain that are associated with so-called sympathetic 
arousal. It makes us more alert. This is actually what wakes us up in the middle of the 
night if we have consumed too much fluid prior to sleep and we need to urinate we wake 
up. This is a mechanism that is not adequately developed in babies and young children. 
This is why babies, young children often will wet their bed and believe it or not in both 
humans and in dogs. Our ability to control urination voluntarily is something that we 
actually learn. Babies, just pee in their diaper dogs, just pee on the floor until they're 
house broken or until a child learns to hold on to their urine until they go to the bathroom 
in a bathroom or a particularly appropriate location, Outdoors or otherwise. The point is 
that hydration of the body is signaled to the brain when we have enough fluid in the 
tissues of our body when we've consumed enough fluid, even if it hasn't already arrived 
to the cells and tissues of our body. That is signal to the brain. In the form of alertness 
and that alertness is what translates to the enhanced cognitive abilities that we have 
when we are well hydrated, it's also what translates to our enhanced physical abilities 
when we are challenged with physical tasks. So when you look out on the landscape of 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
all these studies that have shown impairments in physical or cognitive performance, 
under conditions of even slight dehydration, that all makes sense because our cells need 
fluid or we need water. But it also prompts the question of well does being well hydrated 
actually make our brain and body function better in the context of physical and cognitive 
performance, and indeed the answer is yes. 
 
01:23:53 Tool: Water Filtration; Nighttime Urination 
 
Now earlier we were talking about these equations that you can apply, and here again I 
really want to emphasize that these equations were not meant to be followed down to 
the decimal point. They were really meant an arment AS crude, but sufficient guides for 
you to make sure that you're getting enough hydration depending on your levels of 
activity and at rest. If you recall, when we talked about those equations, I said you need 
about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of fluid per hour for the first 10 hours of your day 
after awaken now. Why did I say for the first 10 hours? Well, it turns out that the filtration 
of fluids from your body, which is accomplished, of course, by your kidneys and by way 
of your bladder and the excretion of fluid out urethra so-called urination, is strongly 
strongly circadian dependent, meaning the cells of your kidney and the cells. Even of 
your gut, in fact, all the cells of your body, but especially the cells of your kidney, which 
filter the fluid that comes into your body and that make certain hormones like 
vasopressin, which is anti-diuretic hormone. All of that functioning of the kidney is under 
strong regulation by so-called circadian clock genes. Circadian clock genes are genes 
that are expressed in every cell, but that in certain cells of the body very strongly impact 
whether or not that organ. In this case, the kidney is going to be activated, meaning 
functioning at a very high level or at a reduced level, and we can make all of this very 
simple by simply stating what’s contained in this beautiful review. That I will provide a 
link to. If you want to learn more called circadian rhythms in the kidney and basically, 
what is known is that for the first 10 hours after waking, your kidney is filtering fluid within 
your body. At a very rapid rate, there are a number of different cell types that do that, but 
they are basically taking that fluid pulling out any contaminants using hormones such as 
antidiuretic hormone vasopressin, to adjust whether or not you're going to hold on to fluid 
or release more Fluid from your body in the form of urine, depending on the salt 
concentration, depending on how much fluid you need your work output, the conditions 
you're in all of that. However, at about 10 hours after waking, your kidney really starts to 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
reduce its overall level of functioning. Now that doesn't mean that your kidney cannot 
filter fluid 11 or 12 or 16 hours after waking, but it becomes far less efficient at doing so, 
and, thank goodness it does, because you do not want your kidney filtering fluid at the 
same rate at midnight. Assuming you wake up at say, seven or eight or nine a.m that it 
was filtering fluid at 10 am in fact we can say that if you want to reduce your nighttime 
waking in order to urinate, which is a common common question and concern that many 
people Have how can I avoid waking up in the middle of the night to urinate and there I 
say It's Perfectly Normal - to wake up once maybe twice each night to urinate. But if you 
want to reduce the number of times that you wake up in order to urinate across the night, 
maybe even make that number zero times. You will greatly benefit by doing three things. 
First of all make sure that you're hydrating sufficiently during the daytime per the 
equations that we talked about earlier. That will ensure that you are not excessively 
thirsty in the evening and therefore consuming a lot more fluid second and related to 
that. First point is that you do want to reduce your fluid intake at night, provided you 
hydrated sufficiently throughout the day and believe it or not. The rate at which fluid 
moves from your gut and into the cells and tissues of your body and then from your 
bladder into urine is determined not just by the volume of fluid you ingest, but also the 
rate at which you ingest that fluid. Now you might be thinking, That’s crazy. That makes 
no sense at all right. If I drink a ton of fluid slowly, doesn't it still mean that I'm going to 
urinate a ton? Yes and no? It also stands to reason that you might ask if I ingest very 
little fluid, but I do it very fast. Is it going to be the case that I'm going to urinate it out 
very quickly? Well, yes, and no! The point is that the fluid filtration systems of your body, 
that range from the gut to the bladder and include the kidney of course depend not just 
on the volume but on the rate of fluid that you ingest because of those McKenna sensors 
that we talked about Earlier, if you gulp down a bunch of fluids, you are going to excrete 
those fluids more quickly than if you slip sip them slowly. Excuse me sip them slowly. So 
here's what I recommend throughout the day when you're trying to get your adequate 
yield of water or other beverages feel free to gulp that fluid or sip it. I'M a gulper, not a 
sipper, but many of you are going to be sippers, not gulpers, consume fluid at the rate 
that feels right to you but feel comfortable gulping that fluid. However, in the evening, if 
you are somebody who has challenges with waking up excessively in the middle of the 
night, reduce your fluid intake provided you've hydrated properly throughout the day, and 
I suggest consuming no more than five. Maybe eight ounces of fluid between the time of 
10 hours after waking and when you go to sleep again, if you're very thirsty or you under 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
hydrated or it's very hot, feel free to ingest more fluid. Please. But most people will find 
that if they reduce their fluid intake to about five ounces or less of fluid in that later part of 
the day after 10 hours of having woken up and before sleep and they sip those 
beverages as opposed to gulping them that they Will have fewer bouts of waking up in 
the middle of the night to go to the restroom and ideally zero. 
 
01:29:35 Tap Water Tests, Disinfection Byproducts (DBPs), Fluoride & Thyroid Health 
 
Let'S talk about tap water, and here I have to take a deep breath, not a deep gulp but a 
deep breath, because in researching tap water and what’s contained in tap water in 
different regions, not just in the U.S but around the world. I confess the picture is a pretty 
scary one. I want to be clear, I'm not somebody who naturally orients towards fear or 
conspiracy theories, however, in researching tap water for this episode. By way of 
looking at the peer-reviewed research, meta-analysis reviews, specific research articles 
where specific hypotheses were tested and in talking with experts in toxicology and so 
on, it's a pretty Grim picture. Frankly, when one looks at what’s contained in most tap 
water and whether or not the compounds that are contained in tap water are present in 
sufficient concentrations to negatively impact our health and the bad news. Is that much 
if not all tap water believe it or not? Much if not all tap water contains things that are bad 
for the biology of our cells. There is a silver lining, however, and the Silver Lining is that 
very simple steps that are very inexpensive can be used to adjust that tap water to make 
it not just safe to drink, but that makes it perfectly fine to drink. So That’s the good news 
and we'll get to that in a moment. If you are somebody who is interested in whether or 
not tap water contains things like endocrine disruptors, hormone disruptors that can 
negatively impact reproductive Health in males or females or both It's a Wonderful 
review. Wonderful because it's so thorough, although the news isn't great, it's very 
thorough, which is great, which is entitled endocrine disruptors in water and their effects 
on the reproductive system. This is a review from 2020 that analyzes water from a bunch 
of different sources within the world and essentially focuses on a few key components. 
First of all, it focuses on the concentration of minerals that is magnesium and calcium 
within water. Many people don't realize this, but so-called hard water sounds terrible 
right, but hard water is water that contains magnesium and calcium, which turns out to 
be a good thing. Some water contains more magnesium and calcium other water 
contains less. They looked at the presence of magnesium and calcium because that is 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
going to impact the pH of water in general, the higher concentrations of magnesium and 
calcium in water, the higher the pH that is, the more alkaline that water is and the lower 
levels of magnesium and Calcium, the more acidic or lower pH that water tends to be the 
other thing that this review addresses is the concentration of so-called dbps dog Bulldog, 
porcupines dbps, which are disinfection byproducts contained in water, so obviously 
local governments. The government wants your drinking water to be clean. They don't 
want contaminants in they don't want sewage in that water. They don't want chemical 
contaminants that are going to make people immediately sick, so they treat water, water 
treatment plants treat water with disinfection products and those disinfection products 
create things called disinfection byproducts and the presence of those dbps are just 
disinfectant byproducts can strongly impact the pH Of water, by way of changing the 
concentrations of magnesium and calcium put differently, I do believe that governments 
are trying to provide people with clean water, but in doing so, oftentimes we'll introduce 
things to that water that are not good for us. Now. It'S very clear that dbps can cause 
endocrine disruption in ways that are not good for Reproductive health. I did a very long, 
in fact, four and a half hour episode on fertility and vitality that was male and female 
fertility by the way and vitality. That again, you can find at hubermanlab.com that talks 
about all the biological processes involved in the generation of healthy eggs and sperm 
and and creating a healthy embryos, implantation embryos and so forth. It'S very clear 
that dbps have been shown to disrupt ovarian function, spermatogenesis and fertility 
outcomes, even at concentrations of dbps that are present in drinking water. That comes 
from the tap now. Does that mean that you shouldn't drink tap water? Well, the answer 
to that is a it depends. What does it depend on? Well, it depends on several things. First 
of all, I highly recommend that everybody go online and put in your zip code and ask for 
a water analysis of water that comes out of the tap in that zip code. This is something 
that is readily available online, at least to my knowledge, and, unfortunately, there's no 
specific one site that I can send everyone to to get an in-depth analysis of the drinking 
water that comes out of your TAP. However, I highly recommend that you go online and 
put in your ZIP code or Municipal area code and figure out whether or not your water 
contains x amount of dbps or Y amount of dbps. Now, of course, you're going to get a 
bunch of values back and unless you're a toxicologist, probably not going to know what 
those values mean, but what you're really looking for is whether or not there are high low 
or moderate levels of fluoride in that drinking water. Why do I say that? Well, there are 
studies that show that the concentration of fluoride in drinking water is of particular 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
concern for the thyroid hormone system of the body now thyroid hormone has a lot of 
different roles in brain and body, and thyroid hormone is very important for everything 
from metabolism To levels of energy, when thyroid levels are disrupted or thyroid, 
receptors are disrupted, it can lead to depression when thyroid hormones are optimized, 
it can lead to Optimal mood if there is such a thing, but in other words it helps keep your 
mood elevated. It relates to everything from sleep to reproduction thyroid hormones 
involved in many many things, including bone health and tissue Health generally. So 
essentially, every biological process in your body is impacted by thyroid hormone and 
there's a study that I'd like to highlight, which was published in 2018, and the title of the 
study is impact of drinking water, fluoride, on human thyroid hormones. This was a case 
control study, so this is not an extensive analysis of many individuals. However, what it 
shows is that fluoride, negative impacts thyroid stimulating hormone and so-called T3 
levels, so you have thyroid hormone T3 and T4, even in the standard concentrations that 
are present of and here's an important number 0.5 milligrams per liter okay. So if you 
can get a hold of the fluoride concentrations in your tap water and find out whether or not 
the concentrations are at below or exceed 0.5 milligrams per liter, what you will find is 
that even just 0.5 milligrams per liter of water can disrupt thyroid Function - and this is 
going to be a particular concern for people to have familial so genetically related thyroid 
issues or that are concerned with keeping your thyroid hormone levels healthy, which I 
think is everybody. So I am telling you that you should try and get a hold of some data 
about the water that comes out of your tap. If you intend on drinking tap water - and 
probably even if you don't just know what’s in your drinking water, your local government 
should provide that information and or it should be readily available online and in 
particular, I think it's worthwhile to address how much fluoride is present. In your drinking 
water again, I don't want to create a lot of scare, I'm not trying to trigger fear here. I do 
think, however, by way of reading this review by way of reading the paper that I just 
referred to a moment ago. Again, links to these are going to be provided in the show, 
note captions, that there is extensive evidence that elevated levels of fluoride in drinking 
water are simply not good for us now. That could open a whole discussion of why Florida 
is in our drinking water. In the first place, at all, 
 
01:37:18 Tool: Water Filters 
 
But leaving that aside, it seems to me that most everybody should know how much 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
fluoride is in their drinking water and, ideally everybody. Yes, everybody is filtering their 
drinking water. Now that raises the question of how best to filter drinking water - and that 
brings an answer of it - depends on a couple of things. First of all, how healthy or 
unhealthy do you know yourself to be okay? So if you're somebody who has no health 
issues, you have plenty of vigor you're sleeping well at night, you have no autoimmune 
disease you're, not aware of any health concern minor or major. Well then, perhaps 
you're somebody that doesn't want to filter your water. I would argue that why, wouldn't 
you employ some very low or even zero cost approach to filtering your water? There are 
going to be other individuals who are suffering particular ailments of brain or body, or 
both that absolutely should be filtering their drinking water if they're getting their drinking 
the water from their tap, because it is pretty well established. Now that tap water 
contains a lot of these disinfectant byproducts as well as in most cases exceeding the 
threshold of fluoride, that we know to be healthy for us. How should you filter your tap 
water? Well, you have everything ranging from the so-called Brita type filter. So these 
can be carbon type filters or other filters that you essentially put over a container or a 
compartment where you can pour the water over it. It goes into the compartment below. 
Will those work? Are they sufficient to filter out the disinfectant byproducts? The general 
answer is yes, provided you change the filters often enough, however, it is not thought, 
unfortunately, not thought that they filter out sufficient fluoride. So what I highly 
recommend is, depending on your budget, that you go online and you search for at-
home water filters that can filter out fluoride. There are a number of straightforward and 
inexpensive tools to do that, and here I don't have any relationship to any of the water 
filters or things that I'm going to mention now. I want to be very clear about that: there's 
no brand code or affiliation here. I'M simply trying to direct you to resources that will 
allow you to filter your tap water for it to be more safe for you to consume in a way that 
meets your budget, with the understanding that people have very different disposable 
incomes. So the range of costs here is going to be pretty tremendous. I just want to get 
that out of the way. First, you know there are water filters that you can use repeatedly. 
So these are what I will refer to as picture filters that are less than a hundred dollars now 
keep in mind that That’s a one-time purchase, except for the replacement of the filters 
which, fortunately doesn't have to be done too often. So there are different filters, I will 
provide a link to one that I found, that is, at least by my read of the lowest possible cost. 
So this is the so-called clearly filtered water pitcher with affinity filtration. So this is a filter 
that can adequately remove fluoride, lead, bpas, glyphosates hormones and some of the 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
other harmful things that are contained in most tap water. Again, I do realize that for 
some some people, even an 80 US dollar cost - is going to be prohibitive, but do realize 
that what you're doing here is you're purchasing a unit that can be used repeatedly over 
and over. The reason why it's lower cost than some of the different filtration approaches 
that I will talk about in a moment are that you can't really put all the drinking water that 
you would use say for an entire week or for an entire month. Um in one picture, you're 
going to have to repeatedly pour water into the pitcher in order to filter it. Now, as I 
mentioned before, the range on water filter costs for filters that can adequately remove 
fluoride and all the other things that you want out of your top water is immense. In fact, 
you can find um. You know whole house water filters that are, you know, two thousand 
dollars or more again, these are going to be filters that are going to be in your garage or 
in a laundry room that are going to basically pull from the the piping system of your 
house And deliver purified water, I technically it's not purified, but That’s removing these 
contaminants and fluoride from all the sinks in your house. You could effectively drink 
from any or all things in your house. That’s what explains the higher cost. I think most 
people are probably not going to have the disposable income or have the opportunity to 
include one of these whole house filters, although if you do have the means and it's 
important to you, you could do that and then there are going to be what I would call 
intermediate systems so systems that cost somewhere between 200 and 500 um, 
probably one of the more common ones or popular ones, is a so-called Berkey filter 
system. These are filter systems that again remove the things that you want removed 
from your tap water and they can do it at higher volumes and they're. Typically 
countertop units um. They don't require any plug-in typically, or they only require brief 
plug-in and electricity and they're going to filter out many many liters or tens of liters of 
water, so that you can always have access to that clean, filtered water any time or day or 
night without having To pour over into the pitcher, so I mentioned these different options 
because again I realize that people have different levels of disposable income. As far as 
I know, there's no tablet or simple mechanism that can be purchased as a transportable. 
You know pill that you can just simply throw in water and remove the contaminants if 
anyone is aware of one that can adequately remove fluoride and other contaminants. 
Please put in this in the comment section on YouTube: that'd be the best place so that I 
and everyone else can see it, but hopefully the mention of the different filtration systems 
that I mentioned. Um, we'll give you some choices that I would hope would fall within the 
range that one could potentially afford an important note about filtration, just as in our 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
body, there are mechanisms to Signal mechanical changes and chemical changes that 
occur in our gut in our brain, Etc. Elsewhere and in general, both mechanical and 
chemical changes are signaled across the body to invoke different changes. Whether or 
not those are you know, a response of the immune system or to make us more alert or 
more asleep, Etc. So too, filtration capitalizes on mechanical and chemical filtration. 
What I mean by that is, when you run a fluid water or any other fluid through a filter. 
Those filters are doing two things: they are physically constraining, which molecules can 
go through by creating portals pores that allow certain size molecules to go through and 
not others, and almost always, they contain certain chemicals themselves right. Those 
filters have been treated with certain chemicals that neutralize certain other chemicals. 
Okay, so you may be wondering how, when you filter water, you know magnesium and 
calcium can get through, but fluoride doesn't and That’s because these filters have been 
very cleverly designed in order to neutralize fluoride or to prevent large molecules such 
as sediment and dirt, which is Kind of easy to imagine being filtered, but also to allow 
certain small molecules like calcium, which is small-ish or magnesium, which is smallish 
to still pass through into our drinking water. And this is wonderful, because what it 
means is that by filtering our water, using any of the methods that we talked about 
before you're still going to get whatever magnesium and calcium was present in that 
water, while still adequately removing the fluoride and other disinfectant byproducts. 
 
01:44:18 Tool: Resting Tap Water & Sediment 
 
Now, what if you can't afford any of those options? Okay! Well, here you have an 
interesting zero cost option, it's not as good as the other ones of filtering that water, but it 
is an option and I do think it's important to give options to people who don't have any 
disposable income for the purpose of filtering their Water, which is to draw a gallon or 
five gallons, or maybe even more tap water out of the tap and put it into some some 
container some vessel. So it could be one gallon five gallon 10 gallon container and then 
to let that tap water sit for some period of time to allow some of the sediment to drop to 
the Bottom. Now you might say: well, there's no sediment, there's nothing contained in 
that tap water and it isn't fluoride diluted in the water, and indeed the answer to that is 
yes. However, there is some evidence that letting tap water sit out at room temperature 
and outside the pipes that deliver that water can help remove some, not all of the 
contaminants in that water. If, however, you are filtering the water using any of the 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
methods that I talked about a few moments ago, you do not need to do this. Okay, I 
realize there's a whole world out there of people who insist on putting their water in the 
Sun, or only keeping it in certain containers and putting it out for a few days before they 
get ingested. That to me seems a bit extreme if you want to do that, be my guest, but I 
don't think most people need to do that. However, I do believe that for people who have 
zero disposable income to devote to paying for any kind of filtration system for their tap 
water, the taking that tap water and putting into some container at room temperature and 
keeping it at room temperature for a half day Or a day or more and then pouring off the 
top two-thirds of that water into another container and consuming the water from that 
second container is going to remove some, not all of the contaminants that one would 
need to be concerned about, and here I should mention Something that I neglected to 
mention a few moments ago, if you're going to do this zero cost option and let the water 
sit out for a bit, you would want that water to sit uncapped. Sorry I should have 
mentioned that before uncapped, of course, trying to keep things from falling into that 
water. In fact, you could even put a little bit of cloth above it, so you don't want things 
falling into that water, but you want certain things to be able to evaporate off, and you 
also want some of the sediment to drop down and the reason why this Process of letting 
water sit out would work at all is because many of the contaminants contained within 
water are not present because of the source of that water or even the treatment of that 
water. But rather because of the pipes of that water arrives to your glass or the pot that 
you have from okay and here again, there's an infinite number of variables. So some 
people are living in buildings for which the pipes are very, very old but very, very clean. 
Believe it or not, some people are living in newer buildings and structures that have new 
pipes, but for which the seals between those pipes contain things that are not good for 
you to consume. So by letting water sit out for a while you're able to remove some of the 
contaminants present within the pipes of your home and the build, and even the pipes 
that lead to your home or apartment. Now some people get really obsessed with this 
whole tap water thing and really want to find out all the details about the pipes and what 
sorts of you know hard metals and how much magnesium and how much calcium are 
present in their water. There are ways that you can test your drinking water for those 
sorts of things. Most people I realize, including myself, are simply not going to do that. If 
you want to know what I do, I tend to drink water that is filtered through one of these 
lower cost filters, or if I'm going to be consuming a lot of fluid, I will drink certain kinds of 
fluid that later I will tell you. I have been doing an experiment for sake of this episode, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
looking at so-called molecular hydrogen water, which sounds very fancy and esoteric 
and almost um a little wacky, but it turns out, has largely to do with the amount of 
magnesium and calcium and the pH of that water. So if you are somebody who has a 
very low budget or simply just wants to spend a very small amount of money and try and 
still drink tap water, there is absolutely a way to do that safely, but it does require a few 
of these steps. 
 
01:48:13 Tool: “Hard Water”; Magnesium, Calcium & Cardiovascular Health 
 
So, on the topic of magnesium and calcium, this relates, as I mentioned earlier, to the 
quote: unquote hardness of water. So what of the hardness of water? You know? Is it 
better to have more magnesium and calcium in your water or less some people? Don'T 
like the taste of hard water, they prefer the taste of water that has less magnesium and 
calcium. However, there I would encourage you to take a step back and consider some 
of the literature. In fact, I will mention a paper in particular now published in 2019, which 
describes the quote: regulations for calcium magnesium or hardness in drinking water in 
the European Union. Member states turns out in Europe they do very detailed Water 
Analysis and That’s present in a number of really high quality scientific Publications. This 
was a paper published in regulatory, toxicology and pharmacology, and they cite a 
number of different references in the introduction that, for instance, in here, I'm quoting 
statistically significant inverse association between magnesium and cardiovascular 
mortality. Now, again, That’s a an association. This is not causal, but higher magnesium 
in water, lower cardiovascular mortality, they go on to say the highest exposure 
category, which are people consuming drinking water with magnesium contents of 8.3 to 
19.4 milligrams per liter. Again, when you get your Water Analysis, you can compare 
again. Some of these values was significantly associated with decreased likelihood of 
cardiovascular mortality by 25, compared with people consuming magnesium content of 
2.5 to 8.2 milligrams per liter okay. So what this basically shows, and by the way, the 
reference to that I will, also provide a link to, in the show note caption what this basically 
States is that higher magnesium containing water and it turns out higher magnesium and 
calcium in containing water, so-called harder water may Not taste as good to you but 
turns out to be better for you now, whether or not it can prevent you from getting 
cardiovascular disease. I don't know in fact I would probably just State. No, it probably 
won't prevent you from cardiovascular disease. You still need to do all the other things 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
that are important for avoiding cardiovascular disease and cerebrovascular disease for 
that and what to do in order to avoid cardiovascular disease. I strongly encourage you to 
listen to the episode with Dr Peter attia. That’s coming out in a few weeks that gets deep 
into that topic and the actionable items for avoiding cardiovascular disease, but 
basically, as this study quotes, there is a growing consensus among epidemiologists and 
epidemiological evidence, along with clinical and nutritional evidence. That’s strong 
enough to suggest that new guidance should be issued in terms of how these different 
sources of tap water should enhance, not deplete the amount of magnesium and 
calcium in that water. Now this ought to raise a very important question in all of your 
minds, which is: why is it that magnesium and calcium concentrations are relevant to 
cardiovascular disease? Is it something about what magnesium does in cells or what 
calcium does in cells? Are we all magnesium and calcium deficient? Well, it turns out. 
That’s not the case. The major effect by which magnesium and calcium in water are 
likely to impact things like blood pressure, cardiovascular disease and other aspects of 
cellular function turn out to be somewhat cryptic. But we can make that cryptic aspect 
very clear by saying that when we have more magnesium in particular, but also calcium 
present in our water, so-called hard water, you increase the amount of hydrogen in that 
water. It becomes what we call hydrogen rich and the pH of that water is increased. Now 
again, this does not mean that we are trying to change the pH of the cells of our body in 
any kind of meaningful way. In fact, we don't want to do that. We want the pH of the cells 
of our body to stay in particular ranges, as I mentioned earlier, but having more 
magnesium and more calcium in our water. That is increasing the hardness of our water 
changes, the pH of that water, and it turns out that the elevated pH of water that is pH of 
water that tends to be somewhere between High sevens. So we could say 7.9 up to 
even 9 or 9.2 is going to be more readily absorbed and is going to more favorably impact 
the function of our cells than lower pH water. Again, I want to restate this because I'm a 
little bit concerned that maybe a clip of this is going to be taken and sent elsewhere, and 
someone will get the impression that I'm saying that we actually want to drink high pH 
water that we all need to Buy expensive, high, pH water turns out. That’s not the case if 
you are consuming tap water from a location where levels of magnesium are sufficiently 
high in that tap water again, where the level of magnesium is 8.3 to 19.4 milligrams per 
liter of water. That is if the water coming out of your TAP is hard enough. Well then 
chances are you don't need to enhance the pH of that water or change its magnesium 
concentration? If, however, the water that you're drinking from the tap filtered or not, I 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
would hope, filtered contains less than 8.3 milligrams per liter of magnesium. Well, then, 
chances are the pH of that water is going to be low enough, that it's not going to be 
lending itself to some of the favorable Health components that higher pH water 
cannotice. I did not say that lower pH AKA, more acidic water is bad for you. I didn't say 
that I said that higher pH water can be good for you. 
 
01:53:40 Water Temperature 
 
So let's talk about how and why higher pH water can be good for you and some of the 
best and in fact, very inexpensive sources of higher, pH magnesium, enhanced or simply 
tap water that contains sufficient magnesium can be used and accessed. Many of you 
are probably wondering whether or not you can simply boil your tap water and thereby 
decontaminate the tap water there. I want to caution you. It turns out that some of the 
contaminants present in water are actually made worse by heating water and again I 
don't want to open up. You know a whole catalog of different fears. I, like all of you, I 
presume, use water to cook, pasta rice because I'm an omnivore. I do consume those 
things I confess. If I make yerba mate or any kind of tea or coffee, I tend to use a higher 
quality water source than top water, even if that top water is filtered because I, like the 
taste far more, if I use a really good source of water and again Because I'm not 
consuming those beverages in enormous volumes, that becomes a relatively 
inexpensive Endeavor, but I would caution people against using boiling or heating of 
water as the only method to decontaminate their tap water and instead to also rely on 
some of the filtration systems. That I talked about before and as long as we're talking 
about the temperature of water, there is sort of an ongoing debate online. It'S not a huge 
debate, but a number of people engaged in this debate as to whether or not drinking 
really cold water or room temperature. Water is better for you or worse. For you. This is 
a tough one to resolve. It turns out that if water is very very cold, that is, if you drink it, 
and you can feel that cold water making its way down to your gut and you can actually 
feel it as cold within your gut and That’s sort of a um. You know back of the envelope or I 
should say, uh direct within the gut measure of Cold versus body temperature water that 
it is going to be slower to absorb. That is you're going to feel it sloshing around in your 
stomach for a bit longer than if you were to consume water. That is slightly warmer now. 
That is not to say that you should ingest warm water or room temperature water. 
However, many people find that, when they drink very cold water or ice water, that 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
indeed, it can alter the kind of sensation of the lining of their stomach in ways that at 
least to them, feel like it's altering their digestion, and that makes sense the cells that 
Line the gut are very temperature sensitive. You want this so um for a number of 
reasons, including not consuming food that is excessively hot or cold or damaging your 
gut, but in general, most people know the temperature of fluid that they want to ingest 
and ingest that temperature of fluid. So most people, for instance, on a cold day, want a 
warm or hot fluid. Does that mean that you're not going to absorb that warmer hot fluid? 
No, of course it doesn't you're going to absorb that fluid one way or the other so drink 
fluids. At the temperatures that are to your liking in that moment, in other words, what 
you desire in that moment and don't worry so much about trying to avoid cold beverages 
or trying to make sure that you're always consuming room temperature water as 
opposed to cold water. 
 
01:56:42 Water Types: Distilled, Reverse Osmosis, Hydrogen-Enriched 
 
So now, with your understanding of hard water, soft water, magnesium, the relationship 
between magnesium, calcium and the pH of water and remember our earlier 
conversation where we talked about how higher pH water is actually going to move out 
of the gut and into the body a bit More readily and across those aquaporin channels, 
more readily than lower, pH, more acidic water. Well, that raises the question of whether 
or not all these different forms of water that are out there: reverse osmosis water, 
distilled water, double distilled water, deuterium, depleted water, alkaline water, as it's 
often called whether or not any or all of that has meaningful Health outcomes. Here we 
can address some of those items pretty quickly, for instance, distilled water and double 
distilled water is essentially distilled of that is. It has magnesium and calcium removed 
from it. So my recommendation would be to not drink distilled water. There may be 
specific circumstances where somebody has very high levels of blood, magnesium or 
calcium or calcium stores within the body that would necessitate them drinking only 
distilled water, but that seems like a very isolated kind of Niche case, so in general, 
consuming distilled water is just Simply not necessary now in terms of reverse osmosis 
water. What is reverse osmosis water reverse osmosis water is water that has been 
passed repeatedly through a series of filters that are designed to remove the kinds of 
contaminants we were talking about earlier. So some of the basic contaminants like 
disinfectant byproducts, fluoride and some other large and small molecules that leaves 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
the water ideally still containing magnesium and calcium. Although there's some 
evidence that reverse osmosis water can deprive water of some of the magnesium and 
calcium. So if you are going to use reverse osmosis filters and drink, reverse osmosis 
water, you want to make sure that you're still getting the Magnesium concentrations 
present in that water that we talked about earlier, but in general, reverse osmosis water 
is considered safe, but and for many People this is going to be an important but but very 
expensive to access. The reverse osmosis filters require a lot of changing in the filters 
purchasing reverse osmosis water in its stable form within containers. These are 
typically glass. Containers is going to be pretty expensive and prohibitive for most 
people. That said, there are a number of people out there that really like the taste of 
reverse osmosis water. They report it as feeling more smooth, they think of reverse 
osmosis water, as quote unquote, giving them energy to be quite honest, there's no 
direct studies of the subjective sensation of water in the mouth and in the gut and its 
relative health effects again, the smoothness of Water as one drinks it and goes down 
the gut, it really has no direct relationship to the quote-unquote, hardness or softness of 
water. I know That’s going to shock a number of you. You probably think well hard water 
is going to be hard to drink and it turns out That’s not the case. In fact, many people find 
that with elevated levels of magnesium and calcium and water it actually tastes 
smoother or softer in their mouth, so hard water, tastes, smooth or soft. I know it's all 
very counterintuitive, but I think it's important to point this out, because a number of 
times you'll hear or read about filtering water so that it tastes smoother and better and 
oftentimes That’s happening because the quote-unquote hardness of water, that is the 
concentrations of Magnesium and calcium are actually increasing. So if you're 
somebody who's curious about reverse osmosis water and you can afford the filters or 
the reverse osmosis water already pre-filtered, please be my guest, you know drink it. 
I'M certainly not trying to prevent anyone from drinking it. But there's no peer-reviewed 
evidence that I am aware of that conclusively shows that drinking reverse osmosis water 
is far better for us than drinking other types of water, provided the other types of water 
are adequately filtered of fluoride and the sorts of disinfectant byproducts that we talked 
About earlier, so what about hydrogen water? You may have heard of this or hydrogen 
enriched water or electrolyzed reduced water as a way to access hydrogen in Rich 
water. All this might sound pretty crazy to some of you now. Fortunately, for sake of 
today's discussion, we can take a number of the different categories of let's call. It 
unique categories of water that have been described, including deuterium, depleted 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
water and by the way deuterium, is something that relates to the presence of hydrogen 
ions in water and put very simply water that is extracted from sources that are closer to 
sea level, tend to have More deuterium in them than water that is extracted from sources 
further from sea level, so up in the mountains, for instance, and from Springs further 
away from oceans. As you get closer to sea level, the source is water, separate from 
seawater, tend to have more deuterium, which relates to the enrichment or lack of 
hydrogen within that water, or free hydrogen within that water. I warned you this was all 
going to sound, pretty Niche and that we were going to get a little bit into the chemistry. 
But now I'm going to make it all very simple for you, at least for the non-aficionado 
electrolyzed reduced water, which is a method of using electricity to alter the 
confirmation of the water molecules and their rates of movement as well as well as so-
called hydrogen-rich water or Hydrogen enriched water or deuterium depleted water all 
have the property of having higher levels of pH than other forms of water, such as 
distilled water, reverse osmosis water and generally higher pH than the kind of water 
that comes out of your TAP. Unless you live in a region where your tap water has very 
high levels of magnesium in it, which does occur in certain regions of the world, but is 
not that common more typically, the water that comes out of your TAP does not have 
enough magnesium, meaning not As much magnesium in it as you would like - and this I 
believe, explains in a fairly straightforward way why there is such an appeal of these pH, 
enhanced or alkaline Waters or electrolyzed reduced water or deuterium depleted water. 
There are a couple of reasons, but first of all, anytime, someone is consuming A 
specialized form of water chances. Are it's going to be filtered of the disinfectant 
byproducts, fluoride and the other things that you really don't want in water? So already 
the water is going to be cleaner than would be coming out of the tap. So That’s going to 
indirectly explain a number of the so-called health benefits, both subjective and perhaps 
even objective as we'll talk about that can result from consuming the other. Let'S say 
more esoteric forms of water, at least not of simple tap water. 
 
02:03:26 Hydrogen-Enriched Water, Magnesium, Optimize Hydration 
 
However, if you look at hydrogen or hydrogen enriched water, you really need to take a 
step back and ask what is that you know what are we really talking about, because it 
turns out that you can create hydrogen enriched Water by putting tablets of magnesium 
itself? Small amounts of magnesium dissolving those in water. It will give off a kind of 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
gaseous solution. You'Ll see a bunch of bubbling in there. You certainly want to dilute 
that tablet and then consume the water. And yes, it's true what you've heard about and 
read from these commercial sources. You do want to consume that water within about 
you know 5 to 15 minutes after that tablet completes dissolving now. Why would you do 
this, and I should say that I have now started doing this, not because I necessarily think 
that it's so necessary or so beneficial I will talk about my experience in a moment. I did it 
in anticipation of this episode, because I was researching water and hydrogen and Rich 
water and all these alkaline Waters and what became very clear to me, based on 
reading a fantastic, two-part review. It'S a very extensive review, entitled at least the first 
part is entitled electrolyzed reduced water. Molecular hydrogen is the exclusive agent 
responsible for the therapeutic effects and then there's a second part to this review. This 
is how extensive is entitled: electrolyze, reduced water number, two safety concerns and 
Effectiveness as a source of hydrogen water. What this review uh, which we've linked to 
in the show notes points to, is that all of the health benefits of these different forms of 
water that you hear about out there, deuterium depleted hydrogen, enrich, Etc all seem 
to boil down, no pun intended no boiling included. I should say to the elevation in 
hydrogen that translates into and here's the really meaningful change the elevation in PH 
that occurs when you, hydrogen enrich water. Now there are not a lot of clinical studies 
looking at hydrogen and Rich water, but they're starting to be more than a few and one 
that I'd like to point out and that we'll link to was published fairly recently, which is 
entitled. Hydrogen-Rich water reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis. 
Apoptosis is a naturally occurring cell death during development and is generally used to 
describe cell death of the body. Sometimes this can be good cell death by the way, 
removing cells that need to be removed again. The title of the paper is hydrogen-rich: 
water, reduces inflammatory responses and prevents apoptosis of peripheral blood cells 
in healthy adults, a randomized double-blind control trial. Now this paper looked at the 
effects of drinking 1.5 liters per day of hydrogen enriched water for a period of four 
weeks. They did find significant positive benefits of reduced inflammation and they found 
these changes by way of analyzing things like interleukin 6 and some of the other 
interleukins, which are markers of inflammation. They control very nicely for the fact that 
people were still consuming other forms of water and liquid and coffee Etc, although they 
made sure that they weren't consuming too much coffee and soda. In addition to this 
hydrogen enriched water. But what this paper shows is that indeed increasing the free 
hydrogen in water can improve certain Health metrics in these cells, and this is in 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
keeping with some of the subjective reports that people have stated out there and that I 
myself experienced. I have to say that by drinking hydrogen Rich water, which I will tell 
you how to do fairly inexpensively in a moment, you do get the subjective experience of 
having more energy of feeling better quote, unquote. Now keep in mind, of course the 
placebo effect is a very real and Powerful effect, so it could just be Placebo, although in 
this paper they did of course include a placebo group, so people didn't know if they were 
getting hydrogen which Rich water or non-hydrogen-rich water. I should also mention 
that the improvements in health metrics that they observed in this study were only 
observed for individuals older than 30 years old. Why that is, I don't know the 
conclusions these authors came to in terms of how these individuals, older than 30, 
achieved lower levels, or, I should say, reduced levels of inflammation and improved 
markers of other aspects of biological function? Is that the hydrogen water improved the 
biological antioxidant potential of certain cell types and again, the cell types that they 
mainly focus on? Were these peripheral blood cells in this particular study? Now, how 
could this be? Why would this be well? This goes back to our earlier discussion about 
reduction in reactive, oxygen species, so-called Ross's, and reductions in free radicals 
that can damage cells, so if all of this is sounding very convoluted, I can understand 
why. However, what I like about this study and the two reviews that I mentioned a 
moment ago, is that these studies don't really say that hydrogen-rich water is what’s 
essential. What these studies really point to is that the changes in PH of water, that 
enhancing the hydrogen in water can create is what leads to the enhanced, either 
absorption and or ability of cells, to utilize that higher pH water again, not by changing 
the pH of the Body or of cells, but simply because higher pH water, or we could perhaps 
more accurately State less acidic water. That is harder. Water that contains more 
magnesium and calcium seems to be more readily used by the cells of the body and 
therefore, it's very likely that the individuals in this study were achieving higher or more 
efficient levels of hydration okay. So if any of this is confusing, let me be very clear: I do 
not believe that we all need to drink deuterium, depleted water or that we all need to 
drink electrolyzed reduced water. Nor do I necessarily believe that we all need to drink 
hydrogen-rich water. However, it's very clear to me that all these different forms of water 
are better absorbed and therefore lead to better and more efficient hydration and 
therefore can reduce inflammation blood pressure and improve a number of other health 
metrics. Because of the elevated pH that all of these different purification or water 
treatment methods achieve and that elevated pH again is not changing the pH of the 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
cells and tissues and organs of your body, you actually don't want that. Rather, that 
elevated pH is simply making the water less acidic than it would be otherwise. So the 
simple takeaway is this: if your tap water contains sufficient magnesium per the values 
that we talked about earlier, I don't think you need to hydrogen enrich your water. I do, 
however, suggest that you at least analyze your water or look at some of the 
professional analysis of water, that you can achieve online and filter out disinfectant 
byproducts and fluorides, Etc from that magnesium or, I should say sufficiently, 
magnesium containing water. Okay, put simply if your tap water has enough magnesium 
filter it but drink it and I think you're doing just fine. If, however, the levels of magnesium 
in your tap water are not above that value that we talked about earlier. In that case, I do 
think - and I can completely understand why enriching the amount of hydrogen in that 
water can make that water not only more palatable right, give you the Sensation that it's 
softer or smoother or more enjoyable to drink, then more acidic water would be, But also 
that that water is going to be far more effective in being absorbed and hydrating the cells 
and tissues of your body, which turns out to be very important for an enormous range. 
Perhaps every biological function within your brain and body 
 
02:11:13 Tool: Molecular Hydrogen Tablets, Water pH 
 
So how can you hydrogen enrich your water that actually can be done fairly 
inexpensively? I have been doing that, as I mentioned earlier as part of an experiment in 
preparation for this episode, because it turns out that the water that comes out of my tap 
has very little magnesium in it and very little calcium as well. The way to create 
hydrogen-rich water is, you can simply purchase molecular hydrogen tablets which, in 
reality are just magnesium tablets that dissolve in water and create a free hydrogen that 
can interact with the other water molecules. Now the chemistry behind it has been 
substantiated and I will, provide a link in the show note captions to a paper that gets into 
some fairly extensive detail about the way that having an additional hydrogen in your 
water can adjust the flow of electrons and the adjustment of Free radicals, but keep in 
mind again. This is all through increases in the pH of your water and please keep in 
mind that you can't simply take any other or any old magnesium tablet or capsule and 
put it into water. The configuration of the magnesium in these capsules and tablets is 
such that it allows a rapid dissolving of the tablet and the activation of the free hydrogen 
that can interact with the water molecules. Again, there are only a few scientific studies 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
exploring the real biological effects of these activated hydrogen Waters. The dissolvable 
tablets are the far less expensive way to go than purchasing a pre-packaged and sealed 
hydrogen water. In fact, I don't recommend those Brands because they are quite 
expensive and it's not clear how stable the activated or free hydrogen is in those Waters. 
In any case, this is certainly not something that everyone needs to do. I mention it 
because I have had a good experience with it myself. I also will mention again that I 
have no business or affiliation to any of these products. I will provide a link to a few of 
them in the show note captions for those of you that want to experiment, and indeed 
That’s, why I'm telling you this for those of you that want to experiment with raising the 
pH of your water without having to purchase What is ordinarily quite expensive, higher 
pH water? You can do this with these dissolvable magnesium tablets. My experience 
with them has been quite good. In fact, I plan to continue to use them once or twice a 
day. This is not the sort of thing that you need to do in all the water that you drink. I want 
to repeat, even if you go down this path and you find that you really like the activated 
hydrogen tablet approach. It is not the case that you want to put these in all of your 
water, and you certainly don't want to put them in carbonated waters of any kind that will 
lead to a lot of gastric discomfort. Nor do you want to put them into hot liquids of any 
kind. So again, this is the sort of thing that you do once or twice maybe three times a day 
and you can find out for yourself and measure subjectively. Whether or not you like the 
experience and whether or not you quote unquote feel better 
 
02:14:05 Structured Water 
 
Now earlier in the episode we were discussing structured water or this fourth phase of 
water. I know a number of people out. There are curious as to whether or not ingesting 
structured water is somehow better for us than ingesting non-structured water. All I can 
say about this. Is that it is a very controversial thing to suggest that structured water is 
somehow more biologically effective or better for us than non-structured water. There 
are a number of different ways that one can create structured water. They involve some 
pretty extensive and expensive at-home systems, ranging anywhere from a couple of 
hundred dollars to a couple of thousand dollars or more to be quite direct when one goes 
into the peer-reviewed scientific literature, one will not find that is. There is essentially no 
real evidence that ingesting structured water leads to any specific desired biological 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
outcomes, as I say that I'm sure there are people out there who have still had 
tremendous experiences ingesting structured water, whether or not That’s due to a 
placebo effect or a real Effect of ingesting structured water isn't clear just to give you a 
sense of what my stance is on things like structured water. I think that they are 
interesting and intriguing, but as a scientist in the absence of any quality peer-reviewed 
data at present, I can't really suggest that people go out and start ingesting structured 
water, nor that they adhere to the claims that structured water is going to be Really really 
good for them compared to other forms of water. That said, I do think that there's an 
interesting and open space for further exploration of the biological effects of structured 
water, given the fact that structured water does exist, I don't think anyone debates that 
and the fact that the different structures of water in this fourth phase Of water as we're 
calling, it has been shown to interface with solids and other aspects of liquids and can do 
so within organelles of cells, so different components of cells that control different 
functions, including mitochondria. I think there's a potential there, whether or not there's 
a promise. There is a another question entirely, so I don't want to shut the door on 
structured water. I think this is an open question that I hope there will be more data to 
answer those questions in the not too distant future. And meanwhile, if any of you are 
aware of good clinical studies, exploring the biological effects of structured water in 
either animal models or humans, please put those references in the comments on 
YouTube, because I'm very curious as to how this area of biological effects of structured 
water Is evolving and continues to evolve 
 
02:16:39 Tool: Water Pipes, Faucet Filter 
 
So today we discussed water and admittedly we went into a lot of detail about the 
physics and chemistry of water in its various forms, and we talked about hydration 
because I think That’s the main reason why many of you are interested in or concerned 
about water. We also talked about contaminants in tap water, which, unfortunately, do 
exist in a very prominent in essentially all regions of the world. So please do get some 
information about. What’s coming out of your TAP, I also want to throw in one other 
piece of information. That’s really critical that I learned about when researching this 
episode, which is the quality of water that comes out of your TAP, is not just dictated by 
the source that it comes from external to your home or apartment. Your pipes are also 
important and that filter, or that little mesh that sits at the faucet head is also very 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

 
important. Most people don't pay attention to that, but turns out that a lot of debris and 
contaminants can be derived from that little filter that most people just simply aren't 
cleaning. Often enough. So here I'm not trying to tell you that the metal or the plastic that 
that filter is made of is a problem. More often than not, contaminants are showing up in 
water because people aren't cleaning those filters, often enough and in fact prior to 
researching this episode. I didn't ever think to clean that filter. I looked underneath my 
faucet and while that filter didn't look particularly filled with debris, I did find that when I 
took it off - and I looked at the other side - there was quite a lot of debris. So if you are 
going to consume tap water, you definitely want to consider the source, the pipes in your 
building, your apartment, the ones that lead right up to your glass or jug, that you would 
put that water into and also that mesh that that water passes Through as it goes into that 
glass or jug, we also talked about how much water to drink. I hope that we finally resolve 
that question for those of you that have been wondering about that. The Galpin equation 
is a wonderful approach to how much water to consume. During exercise and by 
providing these other formulas of about eight ounces or 240 milliliters of water per hour 
for the 10 hours from waking until post-waking on average, remember it's averages. You 
don't have to consume them every hour on the hour, no need to be neurotic. Hopefully, 
you can achieve better levels of hydration, which we know can lead to reductions in 
blood pressure, improvements in appetite mood and focus, and I really think that it's the 
improvements in cognitive focus and physical ability, both endurance, strength and other 
forms of kind of Readiness. In the body, Readiness to perform work in the body that 
really are best supported by the hydration literature and then, of course, we went 
through the different forms of water that you hear about out there and address which 
ones are going to be beneficial or not. And perhaps more importantly, why any of them 
would be beneficial thinking about that from the perspective of biologists and the 
chemistry of water, and I do hope that by arriving at this point in the episode now that 
you have a much better understanding of the chemistry and Physics of water and the 
way that water can powerfully impact your biology, 

